I remember the reaction where he had drawn these characters and he was slowly moving around and like people had no experience with 3D navigation.
It was all still keyboard. We didn't even have mice set up at that time, but slowly moving, going up, picked up a key, go to a wall.
The wall disappears in a little animation and there's a monster like right there and he practically fell out of his chair.
It was just like, ah! And games just didn't do that. You know, the games were the gods eye view.
You were a little invested in your little guy. You can be like, you know, happy or sad when things happen.
But you just did not get that kind of startle reaction. You weren't inside the game.
Something in the back of your brain, some reptile brain thing is just going, oh shit, something just happened.
And that was one of those early points where it's like, yeah, this is going to make a difference.
This is going to be powerful and it's going to matter.
The following is a conversation with John Carmack, widely considered to be one of the greatest programmers ever.
He was the cofounder of id Software and the lead programmer on several games that revolutionized the technology, the experience and the role of gaming in our society,
including Commander Keen, Wolfenstein 3D, Doom and Quake.
He spent many years as the CTO of Oculus VR helping to create portals into virtual worlds and to define the technological path to the metaverse and meta.
And now he has been shifting some of his attention to the problem of artificial general intelligence.
This was the longest conversation on this podcast at over five hours and still I could talk to John many, many more times.
And we hope to do just that.
This is the Lexington podcast to support it. Please check out our sponsors in the description.
And now dear friends, here's John Carmack.
What was the first program you've ever written? Do you remember?
Yeah, I do.
So I remember being in a radio shack going up to the TRS80 computers and learning just enough to be able to do 10 print John Carmack.
And it's kind of interesting how, of course, I've, you know, Carnigan and Richie kind of standardized Hello World is the first thing that you do in every computer programming language and every computer,
but not having any interaction with the cultures of Unix or any other standardized things.
It was just like, well, what am I going to say? I'm going to say my name.
And then you learn how to do go to 10 and have it scroll all off the screen.
And that was definitely the first thing that I wound up doing on a computer.
Can I ask you a programming advice?
I was always told in the beginning that you're not allowed to use go to statements.
That's really bad programming. Is this correct or not?
Jumping around code.
Can we look at the philosophy and the technical aspects of the go to statement that seems so convenient, but it's supposed to be programming.
Certainly back in the day in basic programming languages, you didn't have proper loops.
You didn't have four wiles and repeats.
You know, that was the land of Pascal for people that kind of generally had access to it back then.
So you had no choice but to use go tos.
And as you made what were big programs back then, which were a thousand line basic program is a really big program.
They did tend to sort of degenerate into madness.
You didn't have good editors or code exploration tools.
So you would wind up fixing things in one place at a little patch.
And there's reasons why structured programming generally helps understanding.
But go tos aren't poisonous.
Sometimes they're the right thing to do.
Usually it's because there's a language feature missing like nested breaks or something where it can sometimes be better to do a go to clean up or go to error rather than having multiple flags, multiple if statements littered throughout things.
But it is rare.
If you grep through all of my code right now, I don't think any of my current code bases would actually have a go to.
But deep within sort of the technical underpinnings of a major game engine, you're going to have some go tos in a couple places probably.
Yeah, the infrastructure on top of like the closer you get to machine code, the more go tos you're going to see, the more of these like hacks you're going to see.
Because the set of features available to you in low level programming languages is not is limited.
So print John Carmack.
When is the first time if we could talk about love that you found love with programming?
You said like this, this is really something special.
It really was something that was one of those love at first sight things where just really from the time that I understood what a computer was even.
I mean, I remember looking through old encyclopedias at the black and white photos of the IBM mainframes at the real to real tape decks.
And for people nowadays, it can be a little hard to understand what the world was like then from information gathering where I would go to the libraries and there would be a couple books on the shelf about computers and they would be very out of date even at that point.
Just not a lot of information, but I would grab everything that I could find and you know, devour everything whenever time or newsweek had some article about computers.
I would like cut it out with scissors and put it somewhere.
It just, it felt like this magical thing to me, this idea that the computer would just do exactly what you told it to.
I mean, and there's a little bit of the genie monkey's paw sort of issues there where you'd better be really, really careful with what you're telling it to do.
But it wasn't going to back talk you, it wasn't going to have a different point of view.
It was going to carry out what you told it to do.
And if you had the right commands, you could make it do these pretty magical things.
And so what kind of programs did you write at first?
So beyond the print John Carmack.
So I can remember as going through the learning process where you find at the start you're just learning how to do the most basic possible things and I can remember stuff like Superman comic that Radio Shack commissioned to have.
It's like Superman had lost some of his super brain and kids had to use Radio Shack TRS80 computers to do calculations for it to help him kind of complete his heroics.
And I'd find little things like that and then get a few basic books to be able to kind of work my way up.
And again, it was so precious back then.
I had a couple books that would teach me important things about it.
I had one book that I could start to learn a little bit of assembly language from and I'd have a few books on basic and some things that I could get from the libraries.
But my goals in the early days was almost always making games of various kinds.
I had I loved the arcade games and the early Atari 2600 games and being able to do some of those things myself on the computers was very much what I aspired to.
And it was a whole journey where if you learn normal basic, you can't do any kind of an action game.
You can write an adventure game.
You can write things where you say, what do you do here?
I get sort of tack troll that type of thing and that can be done in the context of basic.
But to do things that had moving graphics, there were only the most limited things you could possibly do.
You could maybe do breakout or Pong or that sort of thing in low resolution graphics.
And in fact, one of my first sort of major technical hacks that I was kind of fond of was on the Apple II computers.
They had a they had a mode called low resolution graphics where of course all graphics were low resolution back then.
But you know, regular low resolution graphics, it was a grid of 40 by 40 pixels normally, but they could have 16 different colors.
And I wanted to make a game kind of like the the arcade game Vanguard, just a scrolling game.
And I wanted to just kind of have it scroll vertically up and I could move a little ship around.
You could manage to do that in basic, but there's no way you could redraw the whole screen.
And I remember at the time just coming up with what felt like a brainstorm to me where I knew enough about the way the hardware was controlled,
where the text screen and the low resolution graphics screen were basically the same thing.
And all those computers could scroll their text screen reasonably.
You could do a listing and it would scroll things up.
And I figured out that I could kind of tweak just a couple of things that I barely understood to put it into a graphics mode.
And I could draw graphics and then I could just do a line feed at the very bottom of the screen.
And then the system would scroll it all up using an assembly language routine that I didn't know how to write back then.
So that was like this first great hack that sort of had analogs later on in my career for a lot of different things.
So I found out that I could draw a screen.
I could do a line feed at the bottom.
We would scroll it up once.
I could draw a couple more lines of stuff at the bottom.
And that was my first way to kind of scroll the screen, which was interesting in that that played a big part later on in the id software days as well.
So do efficient drawing where you don't have to draw the whole screen, but you draw from the bottom using the thing that was designed in the hardware for text output.
Yeah.
Where so much of until recently, game design was limited by what you could actually get the computer to do where it's easy to say, like, OK, I want to scroll the screen.
You just redraw the entire screen at a slight offset.
And nowadays that works just fine.
Computers are ludicrously fast.
But up until a decade ago or so, there were all these things everybody wanted to do.
But if they knew enough programming to be able to make it happen, it would happen too slow to be a good experience, either just ridiculously slow or just slow enough that it wasn't fun to experience it like that.
So so much of kind of the first couple of decades of the programming work that I did was largely figuring out how to do something that everybody knows how they want it to happen.
It just has to happen two to ten times faster than sort of the straightforward way of doing things would make it happen.
And it's different now because at this point, lots of things you can just do in the most naive possible way and it still works out.
You know, you don't have nearly the creative limitations or the incentives for optimizing on that level.
And there's a lot of pros and cons to that.
But I do generally, you know, I'm not going to do the angry old man shaking my fist at the clouds bit where back in my day, programmers had to do real programming.
You know, it's it's amazing that you can just kind of pick an idea and go do it right now.
And you don't have to be some assembly language wizard or deep GPU Arcanist to be able to figure out how to make your wishes happen.
Well, there's still, see, that's true.
But let me put on my old man with a fist hat and say that probably the thing that will define the future still requires you to operate at the limits of the current system.
So we'll probably talk about this. But if you talk about building the metaverse and building a VR experience that's compelling, it probably requires you to not to go to assembly or maybe not literally, but sort of spiritually to go to the limits of what the system is capable of.
And that really was why virtual reality was specifically interesting to me where it had all the ties to you could say that even back in the early days, I have some old magazine articles that's talking about.
Doom as a virtual reality experience back when just seeing anything in 3D.
So you could say that we've been trying to build those virtual experiences from the very beginning.
And in the modern era, virtual reality, especially on the mobile side of things, when it's standalone, you're basically using a cell phone chip to be able to produce these very immersive experiences.
It does require work. It's not at the level of what an old school console game programmer would have operated at where you're looking at hardware registers and you're scheduling all the DNA accesses.
But it is still definitely a different level than what a web developer or or even a PC steam game developer usually has to work at.
And again, it's great. There's opportunities for people that want to operate it either into that spectrum there and still provide a lot of value to the world.
Let me ask you sort of a big question about preference.
What would you say is the best programming language, your favorite, but also the best you've seen throughout your career.
You're considered by many to be the greatest programmer ever.
I mean, it's so difficult to place that label on anyone.
But if you put it on anyone, it's you.
So let me ask you these kind of ridiculous questions of what's the best band of all time.
But in your case, what's the best programming language?
Everything has all the caveats about it.
So what I use, so nowadays, I do program a reasonable amount of Python for AIML sorts of work.
I'm not a native Python programmer.
It's something I came to very late in my career.
I understand what it's good for.
But you don't dream in Python?
I do not.
And it has some of those things where there's some amazing stats.
When you say if you just start, if you make a loop, you know, a triply nested loop and start doing operations in Python,
you can be thousands to potentially a million times slower than a proper GPU tensor operation.
And these are staggering numbers.
You know, you can be as much slower as we've almost gotten faster in our pace of progress and all this other miraculous stuff.
So your intuition is about inefficiencies within the Python sort of.
It keeps hitting me upside the face where it's just gotten to the point now I understand.
It's like, OK, you just can't do a loop if you care about performance in Python.
You have to figure out how you can reformat this into some big vector operation or something that's going to be done completely within a C++ library.
But the other hand is it's amazingly convenient.
And you just see stuff that people are able to cobble together by just import a few different things.
And you can do stuff that nobody on Earth could do 10 years ago and you can do it in a little cookbook thing that you copy pasted out of a website.
So that is really great.
When I'm sitting down to do what I consider kind of serious programming, it's still in C++.
And it's really kind of a C flavored C++ at that where I'm not big into the modern template metaprogramming sorts of things.
I see a lot of train wrecks coming from some of that over abstraction.
I spent a few years really going kind of deep into the kind of historical Lisp work and Haskell and some of the functional programming sides of things.
And there is a lot of value there in the way you think about things.
And I changed a lot of the way I write my C and C++ code based on what I learned about the value that comes out of not having this random mutable state that you kind of lose track of.
Because something that many people don't really appreciate till they've been at it for a long time is that it's not the writing of the program initially.
It's the whole lifespan of the program.
And that's when it's not necessarily just how fast you wrote it or how fast it operates, but it's how can it bend and adapt as situations change.
And then the thing that I've really been learning in my time at Meta with the Oculus and VR work is it's also how well it hands off between a continuous kind of revolving door programmers taking over maintenance and different things and how you get people up to speed in different areas.
And there's all these other different aspects of it.
So C++ is a good language for handover between engineers.
Probably not the best.
And there's some really interesting aspects to this where in some cases languages that are not generally thought well of for many reasons like C is derided pretty broadly that, yes, obviously all of these security flaws that happen with the memory and unsafeness and buffer overruns and the things that you've got there.
But there is this underappreciated aspect to the language is so simple, anyone can go and if you know C, you can generally jump in someplace and not have to learn what paradigms they're using because there just aren't that many available.
I think there's some really, really well written C code.
I find it great that if I'm messing around with something an open BSD say, I mean I can be walking around in the kernel and I'm like, I understand everything that's going on here.
It's not hard for me to figure out what I need to do to make whatever change that I need to.
While you can have more significant languages like it's a downside of Lisp where I don't regret the time that I spent with Lisp.
I think that it did help my thinking about programming in some ways.
But the people that are the biggest defenders of Lisp are saying how malleable of a language it is that if you write a huge Lisp program, you've basically invented your own kind of language and structure because it's not the primitives of the language you're using very much.
It's all of the things you've built on top of that.
And then a language like Racket, kind of one of the more modern Lisp versions, it's essentially touted as a language for building other languages.
And I understand the value of that for a tiny little project, but the idea of that for one of these long term supported by lots of people kind of horrifies me where all of those abstractions that you're like, OK, you can't touch this code till you educate yourself on all of these things that we've built on top of that.
And it was interesting to see how when Google made go, a lot of the criticisms of that are it's like, wow, this is not a state of the art language. This language is just so simple and almost crude.
And you could see the programming language people just looking down at it.
But it does seem to be quite popular as basically saying this is the good things about C. Everybody can just jump right in and use it.
You don't need to restructure your brain to write good code in it.
So I wish that I had more opportunity for doing some work in go.
Rust is the other modern language that everybody talks about that I'm not fit past judgment on.
I've done a little bit beyond Hello World.
I wrote some like video decompression work in Rust just as an exercise.
But that was a few years ago and I haven't really used it since.
The best programming language is the one that works generally that you're currently using because that's another trap is in almost every case I've seen when people mixed languages on a project.
That's a mistake.
I would rather stay just in one language so that everybody can work across the entire thing.
And we have, I get meta, we have a lot of projects that use kind of react framework.
So you've got JavaScript here and then you have C++ for real work.
And then you may have Java interfacing with some other part of the Android system.
And those are all kind of horrible things.
And that was one thing that I remember talking with Boz at Facebook about it where like, man, I wish we could have just said we're only hiring C++ programmers.
And he just thought from the Facebook meta perspective, well, we just wouldn't be able to find enough with the thousands of programmers they've got there.
It is not necessarily a dying breed, but you can sure find a lot more Java or JavaScript programmers.
And I kind of mentioned that to Elon one time and he was kind of flabbergasted about that.
It's like, well, you just, you go out and you find those programmers and you don't hire the other programmers that don't do the languages that you want to use.
But right now, I guess, yeah, they're using JavaScript on a bunch of the SpaceX work for the UI side of things when you go find UI programmers, they're JavaScript programmers.
I wonder if that's because there's a lot of JavaScript programmers, because I do think that great programmers are rare.
That it's not, you know, if you just look at statistics of how many people are using different programming languages, that doesn't tell you the story of what the great programmers are using.
And so you have to really look at what you were speaking to, which is the fundamentals of a language.
What does it encourage?
How does it encourage you to think?
What kind of systems does it encourage you to build?
There's something about C++ that has elements of creativity, but forces you to be an adult about your programming.
Well, it expects you to be an adult.
It does not force you to.
So it brings out people that are willing to be creative in terms of building large systems and coming up with interesting solutions, but at the same time have the sort of the good software engineering practices that amend themselves to real world systems.
Let me ask you about this other language, JavaScript.
So if we, you know, aliens visit in thousands of years and humans are long gone, something tells me that most of the systems they find will be running JavaScript.
I kind of think that if we're living in a simulation, it's written in JavaScript.
You know, for the longest time, even still, JavaScript didn't get any respect, and yet it runs so much of the world and an increasing number of the world.
Is it possible that all everything will be written in JavaScript one day?
So the engineering under JavaScript is really pretty phenomenal.
The systems that make JavaScript run as fast as it does right now are kind of miracles of modern engineering in many ways.
It does feel like it is not an optimal language for all the things that it's being used for or an optimal distribution system to build huge apps in something like this without type systems and so on.
But I think for a lot of people, it does reasonably the necessary things.
It's still a C flavored language.
It's still a braces and semicolon language. It's not hard for people to be trained in JavaScript and then understand the roots of where it came from.
I think garbage collection is unequivocally a good thing for most programs to be written in.
It's funny that I still, just this morning, I was on, I was seeing a Twitter thread of a bunch of really senior game dev people arguing about the virtues and costs of garbage collection.
You will run into some people that are top notch programmers that just say, no, this is literally not a good thing.
Oh, because it makes you lazy?
Yes, that it makes you not think about things.
And I do disagree.
I think that there is so much objective data on the vulnerabilities that have happened in C and C++ programs, sometimes written by the best programmers in the world.
It's like nobody is good enough to avoid ever shooting themselves in the foot with that.
You write enough C code, you're going to shoot yourself in the foot.
And garbage collection is a very great thing for the vast majority of programs.
It's only when you get into the tightest of real time things that you start saying it's like, no, the garbage collection has more costs than it has benefits for me there.
But that's not 99 plus percent of all the software in the world.
So JavaScript is not terrible in those ways.
And so much of programming is not the language itself, it's the infrastructure that surrounds it, all the libraries that you can get and the different ways you can deploy it, the portability that it gives you.
And JavaScript is really strong on a lot of those things where for a long time, and it still does if I look at it, the web stack about everything that has to go when you do something really trivial in JavaScript
and it shows up on a web browser to kind of x ray through that and see everything that has to happen for your one little JavaScript statement to turn into something visible in your web browser.
It's very, very disquieting, just the depth of that stack and the fact that so few people can even comprehend all of the levels that are going on there.
But it's again, I have to caution myself to not be the in the good old days old man about it because clearly there's enormous value here.
The world does run on JavaScript to a pretty good approximation there and it's not falling apart.
There's a bunch of scary stuff where you look at console logs and you just see all of these bad things that are happening, but it's still kind of limping along and nobody really notices.
But so much of my systems design and systems analysis goes around.
You should understand what the speed of light is, like what would be the best you could possibly do here.
And it sounds horrible, but in a lot of cases, you can be a thousand times off your speed of light velocity for something and it's still be okay.
And in fact, it can even sometimes still be the optimal thing in a larger system standpoint where there's a lot of things that you don't want to have to parachute in someone like me to go in and say, make this this web page run a thousand times faster.
You know, make this web app into a hardcore native application that starts up in 37 milliseconds and everything responds in less than one frame latency.
That's just not necessary. And if somebody wants to go pay me millions of dollars to do software like that when they can take somebody right out of a boot camp and say spin up an application for this, often being efficient is not really the best metric.
And it's like there's that applies in a lot of areas where it's kind of interesting how a lot of our appliances and everything are all built around energy efficiency, sometimes at the expense of robustness in some other ways or higher costs in other ways where there's
interesting things where energy or electricity could become much cheaper in a future world and that could change our engineering tradeoffs for the way we build certain things where you could throw away efficiency and actually get more benefits that actually matter.
That's one of my, you know, I one of the directions I was considering swerving into was nuclear energy when I was kind of like, what do I want to do next?
It was either going to be cost effective nuclear fission or artificial general intelligence. And one of the one of my pet ideas there is like, you know, people don't understand how cheap nuclear fuel is.
And there would be ways that you could be a quarter of the efficiency or less. But if it wound up making your plant 10 times cheaper, that could be a radical innovation and something like that.
So there's like some of these thoughts around like direct fission energy conversion, fission fragment conversion that, you know, maybe you build something that doesn't require all the steam turbines and everything, even if it winds up being less efficient.
So that applies a lot in programming where there's always it's always good to know what you could do if you really sat down and took it took it far because sometimes there's discontinuities like around user reaction times.
There are some points where the difference between operating in one second and 750 milliseconds, not that huge. You'll see it in web page statistics, but most of the usability stuff, not that great.
But if you get down to 50 milliseconds, then all of a sudden this just feels amazing, you know, it's just like doing your bidding instantly rather than you're giving it a command, twiddling your thumbs, waiting for it to respond.
So sometimes it's important to really crunch hard to get over some threshold. But there are there are broad basins in the value metric for lots of work where it just doesn't pay to even go that extra mile.
And they're craftsmen that, you know, they just don't want to buy that and more power to them. You know, if somebody just wants to say, no, I'm going to be, my pride is in my work.
I'm never going to do something that's not as good as I could possibly make it. I respect that and sometimes I am that person.
But I try to focus more on the larger value picture and you do pick your battles and you deploy your resources in the play that's going to give you sort of the best user value in the end.
Well, if you look at the evolution of life on Earth as a kind of programming effort, it seems like efficiency isn't the thing that's being optimized for.
Like natural selection is very inefficient, but it kind of adapts and through the process of adaptations, building more and more complex systems that are more and more intelligent, the final result is kind of pretty interesting.
And so I think of JavaScript the same way. It's like this giant mess that, you know, things naturally die off if they don't work.
And if they become useful to people, they kind of naturally live and then you build this community, large community of people that are generating code and some code is sticky, some is not.
And nobody knows the inefficiencies or the efficiencies or the breaking points, like how reliable this code is and you kind of just run it, assume it works and then get unpleasantly surprised and then that's very kind of the evolutionary process.
So that's a really good analogy and we can go a lot of places with that where in the earliest days of programming when you had finite, you could count the bytes that you had to work on this.
You had all the kind of hackers playing code golf to be one less instruction than the other person's multiply routine to kind of get through and it was so perfectly crafted.
It was a crystal piece of artwork when you had a program because there just were not that many. You couldn't afford to be lazy in different ways.
And in many ways I see that as akin to the symbolic AI work where again, if you did not have the resources to just say, well, we're going to do billions and billions of programmable weights here.
You have to turn it down into something that is symbolic and crafted like that.
But that's definitely not the way DNA and life and biological evolution and things work.
On the one hand, it's almost humbling how little programming code is in our bodies.
We've got a couple billion base pairs and it's like this all fits on a thumb drive for years now and then our brains are even a smaller section of that.
You've got maybe 50 megabytes and this is not like Shannon Limit perfectly information dense conveyances here.
It's like these are messy codes.
They're broken up into amino acids.
A lot of them don't do important things or they do things in very awkward ways.
But it is this process of just accumulation on top of things and you need scale.
Both you need scale for the population for that to work out.
In the early days, in the 50s and 60s, the ancient era of computers where you could count when they say like when the Internet started even in the 70s, there were 18 hosts or something on it.
It was this small finite number and you were still optimizing everything to be as good as you possibly could be.
But now it's billions and billions of devices and everything going on.
You can have this very much natural evolution going on where lots of things are tried, lots of things are blowing up.
Venture capitalists lose their money when a startup invested in the wrong tech stack and things completely failed or failed the scale.
But good things do come out of it and it's interesting to see the mimetic evolution of the way different things happen.
Like mentioning Hello World at the beginning.
It's funny how some little thing like that where everybody, every programmer knows Hello World now and that was a completely arbitrary sort of decision that just came out of the dominance of Unix and C and early examples of things like that.
So millions of experiments are going on all the time, but some things do kind of rise to the top and win the fitness war for whether it's mind space or programming techniques or anything.
Like there's a site on Stack Exchange called CodeGolf where people compete to write the shortest possible program for a particular task in all the different kinds of languages.
And it's really interesting to see folks kind of their masters of their craft really play with the limits of programming languages.
It's really beautiful to see.
And across all the different programming languages, you get to see some of these weird programming languages and mainstream ones.
The difference between Python 2 and 3, you get to see the difference between C and C++ and Java and you get to see JavaScript, all of that.
And it's kind of inspiring to see how much depth of possibility there is within programming languages that CodeGolf kind of tasks reveal.
Most of us, if you do any kind of programming, you kind of do boring kind of very vanilla type of code.
That's the way to build large systems, but it's nice to see that the possibility of creative genius is still within those languages.
It's laden within those languages.
So given that you are once again one of the greatest programmers ever, what do you think makes a good programmer?
Maybe a good modern programmer.
So I just gave a long rant slash lecture at Meta to the TPM organization.
And my biggest point was everything that we're doing really should flow from user value.
You know, all the good things that we're doing.
It's like we're not technical people.
It's like you shouldn't be taking pride just in the specific thing like CodeGolf is the sort of thing.
It's a fun puzzle game, but that really should not be a major motivator for you.
It's like we're solving problems for people or we're providing entertainment to people.
We're doing something of value to people that's displacing something else in their life.
So we want to be providing a net value over what they could be doing, but instead they're choosing to use our products.
And that's where, I mean, it sounds triter corny, but I fundamentally do think that's how you make the world a better place.
If you have given more value to people than it took you and your team to create, then the world's a better place.
People have gone from something of lesser value, chosen to use your product and their life feels better for that.
And if you've produced that economically, that's a really good thing.
On the other hand, if you spent ridiculous amounts of money, you've just kind of shoveled a lot of cash into a woodchipper there
and you should maybe not feel so good about what you're doing.
So being proud about a specific architecture or a specific technology or a specific code sequence that you've done,
it's great to get a little smile, like a tiny little dopamine hit for that.
But the top level metric should be that you're building things of value.
Now, you can get into the argument about what is user value, how do you actually quantify that.
And there can be big arguments about that, but it's easy to be able to say,
okay, this pissed off user there is not getting value from what you're doing.
This user over there with the big smile on their face, the moment of delight when something happened,
there's a value that's happened there.
I mean, you have to at least accept that there is a concept of user value.
Even if you have trouble exactly quantifying it, you can usually make relative arguments about it.
Well, this was better than this.
We've improved things.
So being a servant to the user is your job when you're a developer.
You want to be producing something that other people are going to find valuable.
And if you are technically inclined, then finding the right levers to be able to pull,
to be able to make a design that's going to produce the most value for the least amount of effort.
There's a ratio there where it's a problem at the big tech companies, whether it's MetaGoogle,
Apple, Microsoft, Amazon, companies that have almost infinite money.
I mean, I know their CFO will complain that it's not infinite money,
but for most developer standpoints, it really does feel like it.
And it's almost counterintuitive that if you're working hard as a developer on something,
there's always this thought, if only I had more resources, more people, more RAM, more megahertz,
then my product will be better.
And that sense that at certain points, it's certainly true that if you are really hamstrung by this,
removing an obstacle will make a better product, make more value.
But if you're not making your core design decisions in this fiercely competitive way
where you're saying feature A or feature B, you can't just say, let's do both,
because then you're not making a value judgment about them.
You're just saying, well, they both seem good.
I don't want to necessarily have to pick out which one is better or how much better
and tell team B that, sorry, we're not going to do this because A is more important.
But that notion of always having to really critically value what you're doing,
your time, the resources you expend, even the opportunity cost of doing something else,
that's super important.
Well, let me ask you about the big debates that you're mentioning of how to measure value.
Is it possible to measure it kind of numerically,
or can you do the sort of Johnny Ive, the designer route of imagining
sort of somebody using a thing and imagining a smile on their face,
imagining the experience of love and joy that you have when you use the thing.
That's from a design perspective.
Or if you're building more like a lower level thing for Linux,
you imagine a developer that might come across this and use it and become happy
and better off because of it.
So where do you land on those things?
I imagine like Meta and Google will probably try to measure the thing.
It's like you try to optimize engagement or something.
Let's measure engagement.
I admire the designer ethic of think of a future that's immeasurable
and you try to make somebody in that future that's different from today happy.
So I do usually favor if you can get any kind of a metric that's good by all means
listen to the data, but you can go too far there where we've had problems where
it's like, hey, we had a performance regression because our fancy new telemetry system
is doing a bazillion file rights to kind of archive this stuff
because we needed to collect information to determine if we were doing,
you know, if our plans were good.
So when information is available, you should never ignore it.
For actual users using the thing, human beings using the thing,
large number of human beings, and you get to see sort of all the large numbers.
So there's zero to one problem of when you're doing something really new,
you do kind of have to make a guess.
But one of the points that I've been making at Meta is we have more than enough users now
that anything somebody wants to try in VR, we have users that will be interested in that.
You do not get to make a completely greenfield blue sky pitch and say,
I'm going to do this because I think it might be interesting.
I challenge everyone.
There are going to be people, whether it's, you know, working in VR on your,
like on your desktop replacement or communicating with people in different ways
or playing the games, there are going to be probably millions of people,
or at least if you pick some tiny niche that we're not in right now,
there's still going to be thousands of people out there that have the headsets
that would be your target market.
And I tell people, pay attention to them.
Don't invent fictional users.
Don't make an Alice Bob Charlie that fits whatever matrix of tendencies
that you want to break the market down to because it's a mistake to think about
imaginary users when you've got real users that you could be working with.
But on the other hand, there is value to having a kind of wholeness of vision for a product.
And companies like Meta have, you know, they understand the tradeoffs
where you can have a company like SpaceX or, you know, Apple and the Steve Jobs era
where you have a very powerful leading personality that I, you know,
that can micromanage at a very low level and can say it's like,
no, that handle needs to be different or that icon needs to change the tint there.
And they clearly get a lot of value out of it.
They also burn through a lot of employees that have horror stories to tell about
working there afterwards.
My position is that you're at your best when you've got a leader
that is at their limit of what they can kind of comprehend of everything below them
and they can have an informed opinion about everything that's going on.
And you take somebody, you've got to believe that somebody that has 30, 40 years of experience,
you would hope that they've got wisdom that the just out of boot camp person
contributing doesn't have and that if they're like, well, that's wrong there,
you probably shouldn't do it that way or even just don't do it that way, do it another way.
So there's value there, but it can't go beyond a certain level.
I mean, I have Steve Jobs stories of him saying things that are just wrong
right in front of me about technical things because he was not operating at that level.
But when it does work and you do get that kind of passionate leader
that's thinking about the entire product and just really deeply cares about
not letting anything slip through the cracks, I think that's got a lot of value.
But the other side of that is the people saying that, well,
we want to have these independent teams that are bubbling up the ideas
because it's almost anti capitalist or anti free market to say it's like,
I want my great leader to go ahead and dictate all these points there
where clearly free markets bring up things that you don't expect.
Like in VR, we saw a bunch of things like it didn't turn out at all
the way the early people thought were going to be the key applications
and things that would not have been approved by the dark cabal
making the decisions about what gets into the store
turn out in some cases be extremely successful.
So I definitely kind of wanted to be there as a point where I did make a pitch.
It's like, hey, make me VR dictator and I'll go in and get shit done.
And that's just, it's not in the culture at Metta.
They understand the trade offs and that's just not the way,
that's not the company that they want, the team that they want to do.
It's fascinating because VR and we'll talk about it more.
It's still unclear to me in what way VR will change the world
because it does seem clear that VR will somehow fundamentally transform this world
and it's unclear to me how.
Let me know when you want to get into that.
Hold on a second.
Stick to the you being the best programmer ever.
Okay, in the early days when you didn't have adult responsibilities
of leading teams and all that kind of stuff
and you can focus on just being a programmer,
what did the productive day in the life of John Carmack look like?
How many hours of the keyboard? How much sleep?
What was the source of calories that fueled the brain?
What was it like? What time did you wake up?
So I was able to be remarkably consistent about
what was good working conditions for me for a very long time.
I was never one of the programmers that would do all nighters going through
work for 20 hours straight.
It's like my brain generally starts turning to mush after 12 hours or so.
But the hard work is really important
and I would work for decades.
I would work 60 hours a week.
I would work a 10 hour day, 6 days a week,
and try to be productive at that.
Now my schedule shifted around a fair amount
when I was young without any kids,
any other responsibilities.
I was on one of those cycling schedules
where I'd kind of get in an hour later each day
and roll around through the entire time
and I'd wind up kind of pulling in at 2 or 3 in the afternoon sometimes
and then working again past midnight or 2 in the morning.
And that was when it was just me trying to make things happen.
And I was usually isolated off in my office.
People generally didn't bother me much at it
and I could get a lot of programming work done that way.
I did settle into a more normal schedule
when I was taking kids to school and things like that.
So kids were the forcing function that got you to wake up at the same time?
It's not clear to me that there was much of a difference
in the productivity with that where I kind of feel...
If I just get up when I feel like it,
it's usually a little later each day,
but I just recently made the focusing decision
to try to push my schedule back a little bit earlier
to getting up at 8 in the morning
and trying to shift things around.
I'm often doing experiments with myself about
what should I be doing to be more productive.
And one of the things that I did realize was happening in recent months
where I would go for a walk or a run.
I cover like four miles a day
and I would usually do that just as the sun's going down here in Texas now
and it's still really damn hot,
but I'd go out at 8.30 or something
and cover the time there and then the showering.
And it was putting a hold in my day
where I would have still a couple of hours after that
and sometimes my best hours were at night
and I'd be like, I don't know what else is around.
Nobody's bothering me,
but that hole in the day was a problem.
So just a couple of weeks ago,
I made the change to go ahead and say,
all right, I'm going to get up a little earlier.
I'm going to do a walk or get out there first
so I can have more uninterrupted time.
So I'm still playing with factors like this
as I kind of optimize my work efforts,
but it's always been...
It was 60 hours a week for a very long time.
To some degree, I had a little thing in the back of my head
where I would have a lot of programmers
that would do these marathon sessions.
And I had Dave Taylor, one of the guys that he had.
He would be one of those people
that would fall asleep under his desk sometimes
and all the kind of classic hacker tropes about things.
And a part of me was always a little bothered
that that wasn't me,
that I wouldn't go program 20 hours straight
because I'm falling apart
and not being very effective after 12 hours.
I mean, yeah, 12 hour programming,
that's fine when you're doing that,
but not doing smart work much after.
At least I'm not, but there's a range of people.
I mean, that's something that a lot of people
don't really get in their gut
where there are people that work on four hours of sleep
and are smart and can continue to do good work,
but then there's a lot of people that just fall apart.
So I do tell people that
I always try to get eight hours of sleep.
It's not this, you know,
push yourself harder, get up earlier.
I just do worse work where, you know,
you can work 100 hours a week
and people get eight hours of sleep
if you just kind of prioritize things correctly.
But I do believe in working hard, working a lot.
There was a comment that Game Dev made
that I know there's a backlash
against really hard work in a lot of cases,
and I get into online arguments about this all the time,
but he was basically saying, yeah, 40 hours a week,
that's kind of a part time job.
And if you were really in it,
you're doing what you think is important,
what you're passionate about,
what your work gets more done.
And it's just really not possible to argue with that
if you've been around the people
that work with that level of intensity and just say,
it's like, no, they should just stop.
And we had, I kind of came back around to that
a couple years ago where I was using the fictional example of,
all right, some people say,
they'll say with a straight face, they think,
no, you are less productive
if you work more than 40 hours a week.
You're not really misinterpreting things
where your marginal productivity for an hour after eight hours
is less than in one of your peak hours,
but you're not literally getting less done.
There is a point where you start breaking things
and getting worse behavior and everything out of it
where you're literally going backwards,
but it's not at eight or 10 or 12 hours.
And the fictional example I would use was,
imagine there's an asteroid coming to crash into Earth,
destroy all of human life.
Do you want Elon Musk or the people working at SpaceX
that are building the interceptor
that's going to deflect the asteroid?
Do you want them to clock out at five
because, damn it, they're just going to do worse work
if they work another couple hours?
And it seems absurd.
And that's a hypothetical, though,
and everyone can dismiss that,
but then when coronavirus was hitting
and you have all of these medical personnel
that are clearly pushing themselves really, really hard,
and I'd say it's like, okay, do you want all of these scientists
working on treatments and vaccines
and caring for all of these people?
Are they really screwing everything up
by working more than eight hours a day?
And of course, people say I'm just an asshole
to say something like that, but it's the truth.
Working longer gets more done.
So that's kind of the layer one,
but I'd like to also say that,
at least I believe, depending on the person,
depending on the task,
working more and harder
will make you better for the next week
in those peak hours.
So there's something about a deep dedication to a thing
that kind of gets deep in you.
So the hard work isn't just about the raw hours of productivity.
It's the thing it does to you
in the weeks and months after, too.
You're tempering yourself in some ways.
And I think, you know, it's like the Girodreams of sushi.
If you really dedicate yourself completely to making the sushi,
like really putting in the long hours,
day after day after day,
you become a true craftsman of the thing you're doing.
Now, there's, of course, discussions about
are you sacrificing a lot of personal relationships,
are you sacrificing a lot of other possible things
to do with that time?
But if you're talking about purely being a master
or a craftsman of your art,
that more hours isn't just about doing more.
It's about becoming better at the thing you're doing.
Yeah, and I don't gain say anybody that wants to work
the minimum amount.
They've got other priorities in their life.
My only argument that I'm making,
it's not that everybody should work hard.
It's that if you want to accomplish something,
if you want to be stronger and harder,
is the path to getting it accomplished?
Well, let me ask you about this then.
The mythical work life balance.
For an engineer, it seems like that's one of the professions
for a programmer where working hard
does lead to greater productivity in it.
But it also raises the question of sort of personal relationships
that kind of stop family.
How are you able to find work life balance?
Is there advice you can give maybe even outside yourself?
Have you been able to arrive at any wisdom on this part
in your years of life?
I do think that there's a wide range of people
where different people have different needs.
It's not a one size fits all.
I am certainly what works for me.
I can tell enough that I'm different
than a typical average person in the way things impact me.
The things that I want to do, my goals are different
and sort of the levers to impact things are different.
I have literally never felt burnout
and I know there's lots of brilliant smart people
that do world leading work that get burned out
and it's never hit me.
I've never been at a point where I'm like,
I just don't care about this.
I don't want to do this anymore.
I've always had the flexibility to work on lots of interesting things.
I can always just turn my gaze to something else
and have a great time working on that.
So much of the ability to actually work hard
is the ability to have multiple things to choose from
and to use your time on the most appropriate thing.
There are time periods where I am,
it's the best time for me to read a new research paper
that I need to really be thinking hard about it.
Then there's a time that maybe I should just scan
and organize my old notes because I'm just not on top of things.
Then there's the time that, all right, let's go bang out
a few hundred lines of code for something.
So switching between them has been real valuable.
So you always have kind of joined your heart
for all the things you're doing
and that is the kind of work life balance
as a first sort of step.
So you're always happy.
Yeah, I mean, a lot of people would say
that often I look like kind of a grim person
with just sitting there with a neutral expression
or even like knitted brows and a frown on my face
as I'm staring at something.
That's what happiness looks like for you.
Yeah, it's kind of true.
It's like, okay, I'm pushing through this.
I'm making progress here.
I know that doesn't work for everyone.
I know it doesn't work for most people,
but what I am always trying to do in those cases is
I don't want to let somebody that might be a person like that
be told by someone else that no, don't even try that out
as an option where work life balance
versus kind of your life's work
where there's a small subset of the people
that can be very happy being obsessive about things
and obsession can often get things done
that just practical, prudent, pedestrian work won't
or at least won't for a very long time.
There's legends of your nutritional intake
in the early days.
What can you say about being a programmer as a kind of athlete?
So what was the nutrition that fueled it?
I have never been that great on really paying attention to it
where I'm good enough that I don't eat a lot.
I've never been like a big, heavy guy,
but it was interesting where one of the things
that I can remember being an unhappy teenager
not having enough money and one of the things
that bothered me about not having enough money
is I couldn't buy pizza whenever I wanted to.
So I got rich and then I bought a whole lot of pizza.
That was defining.
That's what being rich felt like.
There was a lot of little things.
I could buy all the pizza and comic books and video games
that I wanted to.
It really didn't take that much,
but the pizza was one of those things.
It's absolutely true that for a long time
it did software.
I had a pizza delivered every single day.
The delivery guy knew me by name.
I didn't find out until years later
that apparently I was such a good customer
that they just never raised the price on me.
I was using this six year old price for the pizzas
that they were still kind of sending my way every day.
So you were doing eating once a day?
It would be spread out.
You have a few pieces of pizza.
You have some more later on
and I'd maybe have something at home.
One of the nice things at Facebook Meta
is they feed you quite well.
You get a different, I guess now it's door dash
sorts of things delivered,
but they take care of making sure
that everybody does get well fed.
I probably had better food those six years
that I was working in the Meta office there
than I used to before,
but it's worked out okay for me.
My health has always been good.
I get a pretty good amount of exercise
and I don't eat to excess
and I avoid a lot of other kind of not so good for you things.
So I'm still doing quite well at my age.
Did you have a kind of, I don't know,
spiritual experience with food or coffee
or any of that kind of stuff?
I mean, the programming experience with music
or like I listen to brown noise on a program
or like creating an environment
and the things you take into your body,
just everything you construct
can become a kind of ritual
that empowers the whole process of the program.
Did you have that relationship with pizza or?
It would really be with Diet Coke.
There still is that sense of, you know,
drop the can down, crack open the can of Diet Coke.
All right, now I mean business.
We're getting to work here.
Still to this day?
Yeah.
Is Diet Coke a still partner?
Yeah, probably eight or nine a day.
Nice.
Okay, what about your setup?
How many screens, what kind of keyboard
is there something interesting?
What kind of IDE?
Emax Vim or something modern?
Linux, what operating system laptop
or any interesting thing that brings you joy?
So I kind of migrated cultures
where early on through all of Game Dev,
there was sort of one culture there
which was really quite distinct from the more,
the Silicon Valley venture, you know,
culture for things.
They're different groups
and they have pretty different mores
and the way they think about things where,
and I still do think a lot of the big companies
can learn things from the hardcore
game development side of things
where it still boggles my mind how hostile
to debuggers and IDEs that so much of them,
the kind of big money, get billions of dollars,
Silicon Valley, venture backed funds are.
Oh, that's interesting.
Sorry, so you're saying like big companies
at Google and Meta are hostile to?
They are not big on debuggers and IDEs.
So much of it is like Emacs BIM for things
and we just assume that debuggers
don't work most of the time for the systems
and a lot of this comes from a sort of Linux bias
on a lot of things where I did come up
through the personal computers
and then the DOS and then Windows
and it was Borland Tools and then Visual Studio and.
Do you appreciate the buggers?
Very much so.
I mean, a debugger is how you get a view
into a system that's too complicated to understand.
I mean, anybody that thinks just read the code
and think about it, that's an insane statement.
You can't even read all the code on a big system.
You have to do experiments on the system
and doing that by adding log statements,
recompiling and rerunning it
is an incredibly inefficient way of doing it.
I mean, yes, you can always get things done
even if you're working with stone knives
and bare skins.
That is the mark of a good programmer
is that given any tools,
you will figure out a way to get it done.
But it's amazing what you can do
with sometimes much, much better tools
where instead of just going through
this iterative compile run debug cycle,
you have the old Lisp direction of like,
you've got a REPL and you're working interactively
and doing amazing things there.
But in many cases, a debugger as a very powerful user interface
that can stop, examine all the different things
in your program, set all of these different breakpoints.
And of course you can do that with GDP
or whatever there.
But this is one of the user interface
fundamental principles where when something
is complicated to do,
you won't use it very often.
There's people that will break out GDP
when they're at their wits end
and they just have beat their head against a problem
for so long.
But for somebody that kind of grew up in Game Dev,
it's like they were running into the debugger anyways
before they even knew there was a problem
and you would just stop and see what was happening
and sometimes you could fix things
even before you did one compile cycle.
You could be in the debugger and you could say,
well, I'm just going to change this right here.
And yep, that did the job and fix it and go on.
And for people that don't know,
GDP is a popular Linux debugger
primarily for C++.
They handle most of the languages,
but it's based on C
as the original Unix heritage.
And it's kind of like command line.
It doesn't allow for clean visualizations
and you're exactly right.
You're using this kind of debugger
usually when you're at wits end
and there's a problem that you can't figure out
why by just looking at the codes if defined it.
That's how I guess normal programmers use it.
But you're saying there should be tools
that kind of visualize
and help you as part of the programming process.
Just a normal programming process
to understand the code deeper.
Yeah, when I'm working on like my C++ code,
I'm always running it from the debugger.
You know, just I type in the code.
I run it many times.
The first thing I do after writing code
is set a breakpoint and step through the function.
Now other people will say it's like,
oh, I do that in my head.
Well, your head is a faulty interpreter
of all those things there.
And I've written brand new code.
I want to step in there and I'm going to single step
through that examine lots of things
and see if it's actually doing what I expected it to.
It is a kind of companion, the debugger.
Like you're now coding in an interactive way
with another being.
The debugger is a kind of dumb being,
but it's a reliable being.
That is an interesting question
of what role does AI play in that kind of,
with Codex and these kind of
ability to generate code.
You might start having tools
that understand the code
in interesting deep ways
that can work with you.
There's a whole spectrum there
from static code analyzers
and various kind of dynamic tools
there up to AI
that can conceivably grok these programs
that literally no human can understand.
They're too big, too intertwined,
and too interconnected,
but it's not beyond the possibility
of understanding.
It's just beyond what we can hold in our heads
as kind of mutable state
while we're working on things.
And I'm a big proponent again
of things like static analyzers
and some of that stuff where
you'll find some people that don't like
being scolded by a program
for how they've written something where
it's like, oh, I know better, and sometimes you do,
but that was something that
I was, it was very,
very valuable for me when
and not too many people get an opportunity
like this to have. This is almost one of those spiritual
experiences as a programmer and
awakening to the
software code bases were a couple million
lines of code and
at one point I had used a few of the
different analysis tools, but
I made a point to really
go through and scrub the code base
using every tool that I could find
and it was eye opening where we had
a reputation for having some of the
most robust, strongest code,
where there were some great things that
I remember hearing from Microsoft
telling us about crashes on Xbox
and we had this tiny number that they said
were probably literally hardware errors
and then you have other significant
titles that just have millions of
faults that are getting recorded all the time,
so I was proud of our code on a lot
of levels, but when I took this
code analysis squeegee through
everything, it was
it was shocking how many
errors there were in there, things
that you can say, okay, this was
a copy paste, not changing something right
here, lots of things that were
the most common problem
was something in a printf
format string that was the wrong data
type that could cause crashes there
and you really want the warnings for
things like that and the next most common
was missing a check for null that could
actually happen, that could blow things up
and those are obviously like top C, C++
things, everybody has those problems,
but the long tail of
all of the different little things that could go
wrong there and we had good programmers
and my own code stuff that I'd be looking
at, it's like, oh, I wrote that code, that's
definitely wrong, we've been using this
for a year and
it's this, you know, this
mind sitting there waiting for us to step
on and
it was humbling, it was, and
I reached the conclusion that
anything that can be syntactically
allowed in your language
if it's going to show up
eventually in a large enough code base
you're not going to, good intentions
aren't going to keep it from happening,
you need automated tools and guard
rails for things and those start with
static types or even
type hints in the more dynamic languages
but the people that
rebel against that, that basically
say, that slows me down
doing that, there's something to that, I get
that, I've written, you know, I've cobbled
things together in a notebook, I'm like
wow, this is great that it just happened
but yeah, that's kind of sketchy but it's working
fine, I don't care, it does come back to
that value analysis
where sometimes it's right to not care
but when you do care
if it's going to be something that's going to
live for years and it's going to have other people
working on it and it's going to be
deployed to millions of people
then you want to use all of these tools
you want to be told, it's like no, you've
screwed up here, here, and here and that does
require kind of an ego check about
things where you have
to be open to the fact
that everything that you're doing is just littered
with flaws, it's not that oh, you
occasionally have a bad day, it's just
whatever stream of code you output
there's going to be a statistical
regularity of things that you just make mistakes
on and
I do think there's a whole
argument about test driven design
and unit testing versus kind of
analysis and different things
I am more in favor of the
analysis and the stuff that just like you can't run
your program until you fix this rather
than you can run it and hopefully
a unit test will catch it in some way
Yeah, in my private code
I have asserts everywhere
just there's something
pleasant to me
pleasurable to me about sort of the
dictatorial rule of like
this should be true at this point
in too many times
I've
made mistakes
that shouldn't have been made
and I would assume
I wouldn't be the kind of person that would make that mistake
but I keep making that mistake therefore
an assert really catches me
really helps all the time
so my
I would say like 10 to 20% of my private code
just for personal use is probably
asserts. And they're active comments
and it's one of those things that in theory
they don't make any difference to the program
and if it was all operating the way
you expected it would be then
they will never fire
but even if you have it right
and you wrote the code right initially
then circumstances change
the world outside your program changes
and in fact that's one of the things
where I'm kind of fond
in a lot of cases of static array size
declarations where
I went through this period where it's like
okay now we have general collection classes
we should just make everything variable
because I had this history of
in the early days you get doom
which had some fixed limits on it then
everybody started making crazier and crazier
things and they kept bumping up the different limits
this many lines this many sectors
and it seemed like
a good idea well we should just make this completely
you can go kind of go up to whatever
and
there's cases where that's the right thing to do
but it also
the other aspect of the world changing around you
is it's good to be informed
when the world has changed more than you thought it would
and if you've got a continuously
growing collection you're never going to find out
you might have this quadratic
slowdown on something where
you thought oh I'm only ever going to have a handful
of these but something changes
and there's a new design style and all of a sudden
you've got 10,000 of them
so I kind of like in many cases
picking a number
some you know nice brown power of two
number and setting it up in there
and having an assert saying it's like hey you hit
the you hit this limit you should probably
think are the choices that you've made
around all of this still relevant
if somebody's using 10 times
more than you thought they would
yeah this code was originally written
with this kind of world view
with this kind of set of constraints
thinking of the world in this way
if something breaks that means
you got to rethink the initial stuff
and it's nice for it to
for it to do that
is there any stuff like keyboard
or monitors
I'm fairly pedestrian on
a lot of that where I did move
to triple monitors like in the last
several years ago I had been dual monitor
for a very long time and
and it was one of those things where
probably years later than
I should have I'm just like well the video cards
now generally have three output ports
I should just put the third monitor up there
that's been a pure win I've been very happy
with that
but no I don't have fancy keyboard
or mouse or anything
the key things is an IDE that has
helpful debuggers
has helpful tools so it's not
the Emacs Vimrao and then Diet Coke
yeah so I did spend
one of my week long retreats
where I'm like okay I'm going to make myself
use
it was actually classic VI which I know people will say
you should never have done that you should have just used Vim
directly but
I gave it the good try it's like okay I'm being
in kind of classic Unix developer
mode here and
I worked for a week on it
I used Anki to like teach myself
the different little key combinations
for things like that and in the end it was just like
alright this was kind of like
my Civil War reenactment phase
it's like I'm going out there doing it like they used to
in the old days and it was kind of fun
in that regard so many people right now
they're screaming
as they're listening to this
so again the out is that this was not modern Vim
but still
yes I was very happy to get back to
my visual studio at the end
yeah I'm actually I struggle with this a lot
because
so you said Kinesis keyboard and
I use Emacs primarily
and I feel like
I can exactly as you said
I can understand the code I can navigate
the code there's a lot of stuff you can build
within Emacs with using Lisp
you can customize a lot of things for yourself
to help you
introspect the code like to help you
understand the code and visualize different aspects
of the code you can even run debuggers
but it's work
and the world moves past you
and the better and better ideas are constantly
being built and that
puts a kind of
I need to take the same kind of
treat as you're talking about but now
I'm still fighting the Civil War
I need to kind of move into the 21st century
and it does seem like the world is
or a large chunk of the world is moving
towards visual studio code which is
kind of interesting to me against the
JavaScript ecosystem on the one hand
and IDs are one of those
things that you want to be infinitely
fast you want them to just kind of
immediately respond
and like I mean heck I've got there's someone
I know I'm an old school game dev guy
that still uses visual studio 6
and on a modern computer
everything is just
absolutely instant on something like that
because it was made to work on a computer that's
10,000 or 100,000
times slower so just everything happens
immediately and all the
modern systems just feel
you know they feel so crufty when
it's like oh why is this refreshing the screen
and moving around and updating over here
and something blinks down there and you should
update this and there's
you know there are things that
we've lost with that incredible flexibility
but
lots of people get tons of value from it
and I am super happy that that seems
to be winning over even a lot of the old
Vim and Emacs people that they're kind of like
hey visual studio codes maybe you know
not so bad I am
that may be the final peacekeeping solution
where everybody is reasonably
happy with something like that
so can you explain what
a.plan file is and
what role that played in your life
does it still continue to play a role
back in the early early days
of id software one of
our big things that was unique with what we did
is I had adopted
next stations or kind of next step
systems from I Steve Jobs
is out in the
out in the woods away from Apple company
and
they were basically it was kind of interesting
because I did not really have a background
with the Unix system so many of the people
they get immersed in that
in college and
you know and that's you know that
sets a lot of cultural expectations for them
and I didn't have any of that
but I knew that
my background was I was a huge Apple
to fanboy I was always
a little suspicious of the Mac I was
not really what I what kind
of I wanted to go with
but when Steve Jobs left
Apple and started next this
computer did just seem like one of those amazing things
from the future where it had
all of this cool stuff in it and we were
still back in those days working on
DOS everything blew up you had
reset buttons because your computer would just freeze
if you're doing development work literally
dozens of times a day your computer was just rebooting
constantly and so this
idea of yes any of the
the Unix work stations would have given
a stable development platform where
you don't crash and reboot all the
time but next also had
this really amazing graphical
interface and it was great for building
tools and it used
Objective C as the kind of
an interesting
next was Unix based
it's at Objective C so it has a lot of the
elements that became Mac I mean
the kind of reverse acquisition of Apple
by next where that took over
and became what what the modern Mac
system and defined some of the developer
like
the tools and the whole community
and you've still got if you're programming
on Apple stuff now there's still all these
NS somethings which was originally
Next Step Objects of different kinds of things
but one of the aspects
of those Unix systems
was they had this notion of
a dot plan file where
a dot file is an invisible
file usually in your
home directory or something and there was a trivial
server running on most Unix systems
at the time that
when somebody ran a trivial
little command called finger you could
do a finger and then somebody's
address it could be anywhere on the internet
if you were connected correctly
then all that server would do was
read the dot plan file
in that user's home directory and then just
spit it out to you and originally
the idea was that could be
whether you're on vacation what your current
project was it's supposed to be like the
plan of what you're doing and people would
use it for you know
various purposes but all it did was
dump that file over
to the terminal of whoever issued
the finger command
and at one point
I started just keeping a list
of what I was doing in there
which would be what I was working on in the day
and I would have this little
syntax I kind of got to myself about
here's something that I'm working on
I put a star when I finish it
I could have a few other little bits of punctuation
and at the time it
started off as being just like my to do
list and it would be these
trivial obscure little things like
I fixed something
with collision detection code
made fireball do something different
and just little one liners that people that
were following the games could kind of
decipher but I did wind up
starting to write
much more in depth things I would have
little notes of
thoughts and insights and then I would
eventually start having little essays I would
sometimes dump into the dot plan files
interspersed with the work logs of things
that I was doing so in some
ways it was like a super early proto
blog where I was just kind
of dumping out what I was working on but it
was interesting enough that
there were a lot of people
that were interested in this
so most of the people didn't have Unix workstation
so there were the websites back in
the day that would follow the doom and quake development
that would
basically make a little service that would go grab
all the changes and then people could just get it with
a web browser and there was a period
where like all of the little
kind of Dallas gaming diaspora
of people that were at all in that
orbit there were a couple dozen plan
files going on which was
and this was some years before
blogging really became kind of a thing
and it was kind of a
a premonition of sort of the
way things would go and there
was it's all been collected
it's available online in different places
and it's kind of fun to go back and look through
what I was thinking what
I was doing in the different areas
Have you had a chance to look back is there some interesting
very low level specific
to do items
maybe things you've never completed all that kind
of stuff and high level
philosophical essay type of stuff
that
there's some good stuff on both where
a lot of it was low level
nitpicky details about game dev
and
I've learned enough things where there's no project
that I worked on that I couldn't go back
and do a better job on now
I mean you just you learn things hopefully
if you're doing it right you learn things as you get older
and you should be able to do a better job
at all of the early things and there's
stuff in
Wolfenstein Doomquake that's like oh clearly
I could go back and do a better job
at this whether it's something in the rendering engine
side or how I implemented
the monster behaviors
or managed resources
do you see the flaws in your thinking now
looking back
I mean sometimes I'll get the
you know I'll look at it and say yeah I had a pretty
clear view of I was doing good work
there and I haven't
really hit the point where
there was another programmer Graham Divine
who was he had worked at id and
seventh guest and he made
some comment one time where he said he looked back at some
of his old notes he was like wow I
was really smart back then
and I don't hit
that so much where I mean I look at it
and I always know that yeah
there's all the you know with aging you get
certain changes in how you
you're able to work problems but all of the
problems that I've worked I
I'm you know I'm sure that I could do
a better job on all of them
so you can still step right in if you could travel
back in time and talk to that guy
you would teach him a few things yeah absolutely
it's awesome
I'm what about the high level
philosophical stuff is there some insights
that stand out do you remember
there's things that
there's understanding about
development and I
you know in the industry and so on that
were in a more primitive
stage where
I am I definitely learned
a lot more in the later years
about business and organization
and team structure
there were
I mean there were definitely things that I was
not the best person
or even a very good person about managing
like how a team should
internally how people should work together
I was just I
you know I just
get out of my way and let me work on the code
and do this and more and more
I've learned how
in the larger scheme of things
how but sometimes relatively
unimportant some of those things are where it is
this user value generation
that's the the overarching
importance for all of that and I
I didn't necessarily have my eye on that
ball correctly through a lot of my
you know my earlier years
and there's things that
you know I could have I could have gotten more
out of people handling things in different ways
I am you know I could have made
you know in some ways more
successful products by following things
in different ways there's mistakes that we
made that we couldn't really have
known how things would have worked out but
it was interesting to see in later years companies
like Activision showing that hey you really
can just do the same game
make it better every year and you can
look at that from a negative standpoint
and say it's like oh that's just being derivative
and all that but if you step back again
and say it's like no are the people buying it
still enjoying it are they enjoying it more
than what they might have bought otherwise
and you can say no that's that's actually
a great value creation
engine to do that if you're in a position
where you can I you know
don't be forced into reinventing
everything just because you think that you need
to I am
you know lots of things about
business and team stuff that could be done
better but the technical work the kind
of technical visionary type stuff
that I laid out I still
feel pretty good about there are some
classic old ones about my defending
of OpenGL versus D3D
which turned out
to be one of the more probably
important momentous things there where
it never it was always
a rearguard action on Windows
where Microsoft was just not going
to let that win but when I look
back on it now
that fight to keep OpenGL relevant
for a number of years there
meant that OpenGL was there
when mobile started happening
and OpenGL ES was the thing that
drove all of the acceleration
of the mobile industry
and it's really only in the last few years
as Apple's moved to metal and some
of the other companies have moved to Vulcan
that that's moved away
but really stepping back
and looking at it's like yeah I sold
millions of games for different things
but billions
and billions of devices wound
up with an appropriate
capable graphics API
do in no small part
to me thinking that that was really important
that we not just
give up and use Microsoft's
at that
time really terrible API
the thing about Microsoft is the APIs don't stay
terrible they were terrible at the start
but a few versions on
they were actually quite good and there was a completely
fair argument to be made that
by the time DX9 was out
it was probably a better programming environment
than OpenGL but it was still
a wonderful good thing
that we had an open standard that could
show up on Linux and Android
iOS and eventually WebGL
still to this day so
that was one
that would be on my greatest hits list of things
that I kind of pushed with. In terms of impact it had
on billions of devices yes
so let's talk about it
can you tell the origin story of id software
again
one of the greatest game developer
companies ever it created
Wolfstein 3D games that
define my life also
in many ways as a thing
that made me realize what computers are capable of
in terms of graphics in terms of
performance it just
unlocked something deep
in me in understanding
what these machines are all about as games can do that
so Wolfstein 3D, Doom, Quake
and just all the
incredible engineering innovation that went into that
so how did it all
start? So I'll caveat up
front that I usually don't
consider myself the historian
of the software side of things
I usually do
kind of point people at John Romero
for stories about the early days
where
I've never been like I've commented
that I'm a remarkably unsentimental person
in some ways where I don't really
spend a lot of time unless I'm explicitly
prodded to go back and think about
the early days of things and
I didn't
necessarily make the effort to
archive everything exactly in my brain
and the more that I work on machine learning
and AI and the aspects of memory
and how when you go back and polish certain
things it's not necessarily exactly
the way it happened but
having said all of that from
my view the way everything
happened that led up to that was
after I was
an adult kind of taking
a few college classes deciding to drop
out I was doing
I was hard scrabble contract
programming work really struggling to
kind of keep groceries and pay my rent
and things and the company
that I was doing the most work for was
a company called Soft Disk Publishing
which had the
Sounds Bizarre Now business model
of monthly subscription software
you know before there was an internet
that people could connect to and get software
you would pay
a certain amount and every month they would send
you a disk that had some random software
on it and people that were into
computers thought this was kind of cool and they had
different ones for the Apple 2
the 2GS the PC the Mac
the Amiga
lots of different things here so quirky little
business but I was doing a lot
of contract programming for them where I'd
write tiny little games and sell them
for $300
$500 and one of the things
that I was doing again to keep
my head above water here was
I decided that I could make
one program and I could
port it to multiple systems
so I would write a game like
dark designs or catacombs and
I would develop it on the Apple 2
the 2GS and the IBM PC
which apparently
was the thing that really kind
of piqued the attention of the
people working down there like Jay Wilbur
was my primary editor and Tom Hall
was a secondary editor
and they kept asking me it's like hey
you should come down and work for us here
and I
pushed it off a couple times because I was
really enjoying my freedom of kind of being
off on my own even if I was barely
getting by I loved it I was
doing nothing but programming all day
but I did have enough
close scrapes with like damn I'm just
really out of money that maybe I should
get an actual job
rather than contracting these kind of one at
a time things and Jay Wilbur
was great he was like fedexing me the checks
when I would need them to kind
of get over whatever hump I was at
so I took the
I finally took them up on their offer to come
down to Shreveport, Louisiana
I was in Kansas City at the time
drove down
to through the Ozarks and everything
down to Louisiana
and saw the soft disk
offices went through talked to a bunch of
people met the people I had been working
with remotely at that time
but the most important thing for me
was I met two programmers
there John Romero and Lane Roth
that for the first time ever I had met
programmers that knew more
cool stuff than I did where
the world was just different back then I
was in Kansas City it was one of those
smartest kid in the school does all the
computer stuff the teachers don't have anything
to teach him but all I had to learn
from was these few books at the library
it was not much at all
and there were some aspects of programming
that were kind of black magic to me
like it's like oh he knows how to format
a track on I am you know on a
low level drive programming
interface and this
was I was still not at all
sure I was going to take the job but I met
these awesome programmers that
were doing cool stuff and my Romero had
worked at Origin Systems and he had done
like you know so many different games
ahead of time
that I did kind of quickly decide like
yeah I'll go take the job down there
and I
settled down there moved in
and started working on more little
projects and the first kind
of big change that happened down there
was the company wanted to make a gaming
focused a PC gaming focused
subscription just like all their
other was the same formula that they used for
everything pay a monthly
fee and you'll get a disc with
one or two games just every month
and no choice in what you get but we think
it'll be fun and that was the model
they were comfortable with and said all right
we're going to start this gamers edge department
and all of us that were
interested in that like me Romero
I Tom Hall was kind of
helping us from from his side of things
Jay would peak in and we had a few other
programmers
working with us at the time and we were
going to to just start making games
just the same model
and we dived in and it was fantastic
you have to make new games
every month every month
yeah and this in
retrospect looking back at it that sense
that I had done all this contract programming
and John Romero had done
like far more of this where he had done one
of his teaching himself efforts was he
made a game for every letter of the alphabet
that sense of like I'm just going to go make
26 different games give him a different
theme and you learn
so much when you go through and you
crank these things out like on a
bi weekly monthly basis something
to finish it's not like an I just
an idea it's not just
from from the very beginning to the very end
it's done
it has to be done there's no delaying
it's done and you've got deadlines
and that kind of
rapid iteration pressure cooker
environment was super important
for all of us developing the skills
that I you know that brought us
to where we eventually went to I mean
we would say like like in the history of the
Beatles like it wasn't them being the Beatles
it was them playing all of these other
I am you know early works that that
opportunity to craft all of their skills
before they were famous that was
very critical to their later successes
and I think there's a lot of that here
where we did these games that
nobody remembers lots
of little things that contributed
to building up the skill set for the things
that eventually did make us famous
and just to ask you wrote the
gambler I had to
write it in a month just
make money and nobody
remembers that probably because he had to
figure out because it's literally
he he didn't have enough
time to write it fast enough
said to come up with hacks
literally comes down to that
point where pressure and limitation of
resources is surprisingly
important and it's
counterintuitive in a lot of ways where you just
think that if you've got all the time in the world
and you've got all the resources in the world
of course you're going to get something better
but sometimes it really does work out that
the you know I
innovations mother necessity and you know
where you can resource constraints and you
have to do things when you don't have a choice
it's surprising what you can do
is there any good games written in that time
would you say some of them are still fun to
go back and play where
you get the
they were they were all about kind of the more
modern term is game feel about how
exact feel that things it's not the grand
strategy of the design but how
running and jumping and shooting and those
things I feel in the
in the moment and some of those are still
you if you sat down on them you kind of go
it's a little bit different it doesn't have the same
movement feel but you move over and you're
like bang jump bang it's like
hey that's kind of cool still
so you can get lost in the rhythm of the
game like that is that what you mean by feel
just like
there's something about it that pulls you in
nowadays again people talk about
compulsion loops and things where it's that
I am that sense of exactly
what you're doing what your fingers are doing on
the keyboard what your eyes are seeing
and they're going to be the sequences of things
grab the loot shoot the monster jump over
the opposite will get to the end of the level
these are eternal aspects of game design
in a lot of ways but
there are better and worse ways to do all of
them and we did so many of these
games that it was I we got
a lot of practice with it
so one of the kind of weird things
that was happening at this time is
John Romero was getting some
some strange fan mail
and back in the days this was before email
so we literally got letters sometimes
and telling him it's like oh I
want to talk to you about your games I want to
reach out different things
and eventually
it turned out that these were all coming
from Scott Miller at Apigee Software
and
he was reaching out through he didn't think
he could contact John directly that he would
get intercepted so he was trying to get
him to contact him through like
back channel fan mail because he basically
was saying hey I'm making all this money
on shareware games
I want you to make shareware games
because he had seen some of the games
that Romero had done
and you know we looked at
Scott Miller's games and we didn't think
they were very good I am we're like
that can't be making the kind
of money that he's saying he's making 10 grand
thing I am off of this game
and we really thought that he was full
of shit that it was a lie trying to
get to get him into this
but so that was kind of going on at
I am you know at one level
he was and it was funny the moment
when Romero realized that he had some
of these letters pinned up on his wall like all of
his fans and then we noticed that they all had the same
return address with different names on them
which was a little bit of a two inch sort
there trying to
figure out the puzzle laid out before
him yeah what happened after I kind of
coincident with that was
I was working on a lot of the new
technologies where
I was now full on the IBM PC
for the first time where I was really
a long hold out on Apple 2 forever
and I you know I loved my Apple 2
it was the computer I was wished I had when I was
growing up and when I finally did have one
I was I was kind of clinging on
to that well past it's sort of good use
by the best computer ever made you would you say
um I wouldn't
make judgments like that about it but it
was positioned in such a way especially
in the school systems that it impacted
a whole lot of American
programmers at least where
there was programs that the Apple 2's got
into the schools and they had enough
capability that lots of interesting things
happened with them you know in Europe
it was different you had your Amiga's and
Atari's and you know I'm acorns
in the UK and things that
that had different things but in the United States
it was probably the Apple 2 made the most
impact for a lot
of programmers of my generation
but so I was really digging
into the IBM and this was
even more so with the total
focus because I had moved to another city
where I didn't know anybody that I wasn't working
with I had a little apartment
and then at Softisk again the
things that that drew me to it I had
a couple programmers that knew more than
I did and they had a
library they had a set of books
and a set of magazines they had a couple years
ago they had a set of magazines the old
Dr. Dobbs Journal and all of these
magazines that had information
about things and so
I was just in total immersion
mode it was Eat, Breathe, Sleep
computer programming particularly the IBM
for everything that I was
doing and I was digging into
a lot of these low level hardware details
that people weren't usually paying
attention to the way the IBM
EGA cards worked
which was fun for me I hadn't
experienced with things at that level
and back then you could get
hardware documentation just down at the register
levels this is where the CRTC
register is this is how the
color registers work and how the different things
are applied and they were designed
for a certain reason they were designed
for an application they had
an intended use in mind but
I was starting to look at other
ways that they could perhaps be exploited
that they weren't initially intended for
because you comment on like
how the operating system was there
what instructions said
what are we talking about?
So this was DOS and X86
so 16 bit 8086
the two 86's were there and
three 86's existed they were rare
we had a couple for our development systems
but we were still targeting
the more broad I
it was all DOS 16 bit
none of this was kind of DOS extenders
and things. How different is it from the systems
of today's it's kind of a precursor
that's similar? Very little
if you open up command.exe
on or com on
windows you see some of the remnants
of all of that but it was a different world
it was the 640k is enough
world and nothing was
protected it crashed all the time you had
TSR's or terminate and stay
resident hacks on top of things
that would cause configuration problems
all the hardware was manually
configured in your auto exec
so it was a very different world
but the code is still the same similar
you would still write
my earliest code there was written in Pascal
that was what I had learned
between basic
and C++ there's Pascal
so when basic assembly language
some of my intermediate
stuff was well you had to for performance
basic was just too slow so
most of the work that I was doing as a contract
programmer in my teenage years
was assembly language
you wrote games in assembly?
yeah complete games
in assembly language
and it's thousands and thousands of lines
of three letter acronyms for the
instructions
you don't earn the once again
greatest programmer ever labeled
without being able to write a game in assembly
that's again everybody wrote there
everybody serious wrote their games in assembly language
it was kind of a
everybody serious
it was an outlier to use
Pascal a little bit where there was one
famous program called wizardry
it was one of the great early role playing games
that was written in Pascal
but it was almost nothing used
Pascal there but I did learn Pascal
and I remember doing all of my
like to this day I sketch in data structures
when I'm thinking about something
I'll open up a file
and I'll start writing struct definitions
for how data is going to be laid out
and Pascal was kind of formative to that
because I remember designing my rpgs
in Pascal record structures
and things like that and so I had
I've gotten a Pascal compiler
for the Apple 2GS that I could work on
in the first IBM game that I developed
I did in Pascal and
and that's actually kind of an interesting story
again talking about the constraints and resources
where
I had an Apple 2GS I didn't have an IBM PC
I wanted to port my
applications to IBM because
I thought I could make more money on it
so what I wound up doing is
I rented a PC for a week
and bought a copy of Turbo Pascal
and so I had a hard
one week and this was cutting into
what minimal profit margin I had there
but I had this computer for a week
I had to get my program ported
before I had to return the PC
and that was kind of the first thing
that I had done on the IBM PC
and what led me to taking the job at Softisk
and Turbo Pascal
how's that different from regular Pascal
is it different compiler or something like that
so it was a product of Borland
before Microsoft kind of killed them
they were the hot stuff
developer tools company
Borland, Turbo Pascal, Turbo C
and Turbo Prolog, I mean all the different things
but what they did was
they took a supremely pragmatic approach
of making something useful
it was one of these great examples where
Pascal was an academic language
and you had things like the UCSDP system
that Wizardry was actually
written in that they did
they did manage to make a game with that
but it was
not a super practical system
while Turbo Pascal was
it was called Turbo because it was blazingly fast
to compile I mean really ridiculously
10 to 20 times
faster than most other compilers at the time
but it also had very
pragmatic access to look you can just
poke at the hardware in these different ways
and we have libraries that let you do things
and it was a pretty good
it was a perfectly good way to write games
and this is one of those things where people have talked about
different paths that computer
development could have taken
where C took over the world
for reasons that came out of Unix
and eventually Linux
and that was not a foregone conclusion at all
and people can make
real reasoned rational arguments
that the world might have been better
if it had gone a Pascal route
I'm somewhat agnostic on that
where I do know from experience
it was perfectly good enough to do
do that and it had some fundamental improvements
like it had range checked arrays
as an option there which could avoid
many of C's
real hazards that happened in a security space
but C1
they were basically operating at about the same level of abstraction
it was a systems programming language
but
but you said Pascal had more emphasis on data structures
actually
in the tree of languages
did Pascal come before C
they were pretty contemporaneous
so Pascal's lineage went to
Modula 2 and eventually Oberon
which was another Nicholas word
kind of
experimental language
but they were all good enough at that level
now some of the classic
academic oriented Pascal's were just missing
fundamental things like oh you can't access
this core system thing because we're just using it
to teach students but
Turbo Pascal showed that only modest changes
to it really did make it
a completely capable language
and it had some reasons why
you could implement it as a single pass compiler
so it could be way way faster
although less scope for optimizations
if you do it that way
and it did have some range checking options
it had a little bit better typing capability
you'd have properly typed enums
sorts of things and other stuff that C lacked
but C was also
clearly good enough and it wound up with
a huge inertia from the UNIX
ecosystem and everything that came with that
garbage collection
no it was not garbage collected
so you could still have your use after freeze
and all those other problems
just getting rid of array overruns
at least if you were compiled with that
debugging option certainly would have avoided
a lot of problems and could have a lot of
benefits but so anyways that was the next
thing I had to learn C because C
was where it seemed like most of the
things were going
so I abandoned Pascal and I started working
in C I started hacking on these hardware
things dealing with
the graphics controllers and the EGA systems
and what we most
wanted to do so at that time
we had
we were sitting in our darkened office playing
all the different console video games
and we were figuring out what do we want to
what games do we want to make for our
gamers edge product there
and so we had one of the first Super
Nintendos sitting there and we had
an older Nintendo looking at all those
games and the core thing that those consoles
did that you just didn't get on the PC
games was this ability to have
a massive scrolling world
where most of the games that you would make on the
PC and early
earlier personal computers would be a static
screen you move little things around on it
and you interact like that
maybe you go to additional screens as
you know as you move but
arcade games and consoles had this
wonderful ability to just have a big
world that you're slowly moving your
window through and that was
for those types of games that kind of action
exploration adventure games that was a
super super important thing
and PC games just didn't do
that and what I
had come across was a couple different
techniques for implementing that
on the PC and they're not
hard complicated things
when I explain them now they're
they're pretty straightforward but just nobody was doing
you sound like Einstein describing his
five papers is pretty straightforward
I understand but they're
nevertheless revolutions so size scrolling
is a game changer
it's a genius invention
and some of the consoles had different
limitations about you could do one but not the
other and there were similar things
going on as advancements even in the console
space where you'd have like the original
Mario game was
just horizontal scrolling and then later
Mario games added vertical aspects to
it and different things that
you were doing to explore
kind of expand the capabilities there
and so much of the early game design for
decades was removing limitations
letting you do things that you envisioned
as a designer you wanted the player to
experience but the hardware just
couldn't really or you didn't know
how to make it happen it felt
impossible you can imagine
that you want to create like this
big world through which you can
size scroll like through which you can
walk and then
you ask yourself a question how do I
actually build that in a way that's
like the the latency
is low enough the hardware
can actually deliver that
in such a way that it's a company
and we knew what we wanted to do because
we were playing all of these console games
playing all these Nintendo games and arcade games
clearly there is a whole world of awesome
things there that we just couldn't do on
the PC at least initially
because every programmer can tell
it's like if you want to scroll you can just redraw
the whole screen but then it turns out well
you're going five frames per second
that's not an interactive fun experience
you want to be going 30 or 60
frames per second or something
and it just didn't feel like that was possible
it felt like the PCs had to get
five times faster for you to make
a playable game there
and interestingly I wound up with
two completely different solutions
for the scrolling problem
and this is
this is a theme that runs through everything
where all of these big technical advancements
it turns out there's always a couple
different ways of doing them and
it's not like you found the one true
way of doing it and we'll see this
as we go into 3D games and things later
but so the scrolling
the first set of scrolling tricks that I got
was
the hardware had this ability to
you could shift
like inside the window of memory
so the EGA cards at the time
had 256 kilobytes of memory
and it was
awkwardly set up in this planer format
where instead of
having 256 or
you know 24 million colors
you had 16 colors which is 4 bits
so you had 4 bit planes
64k a piece of course
64k is a nice round number
for 16 bit addressing
so your graphics card had a 16 bit
window that you could
look at and you could tell it to start
the video scan out anywhere inside there
so there were a couple games
that had taken this approach if you could make
a 2x2 screen or a 1x4 screen
and you could do scrolling
really easily like that you could just lay it
all out and just pan around there
but you just couldn't make it any bigger
because that's all the memory that was there
the first insight to the scrolling
that I had was well
if we make a screen that's just
one tile larger you know and we usually
had tiles that were 16 pixels by 16
pixels the little classic Mario
block that you run into
lots of art gets drawn that way
and your screen is a certain number of tiles
but if you had one little buffer region
outside of that
you could easily pan around inside that
16 pixel region that could be perfectly
smooth but then what happens
if you get to the edge and you want to keep going
the first way we did
scrolling was what I called
adaptive tile refresh
which was really just a matter of you get
to the edge and then you go back
to the original point and then only
change the tiles that have
actually that are different between where
it was in most of the games at the time
if you think about sort of your
classic Super Mario Brothers game
you've got big fields of blue sky
long rows of
the same brick texture
and there's a lot of commonality
it's kind of like a data compression thing
if you take the screen and you set it down
on top of each other in general
only about 10% of the tiles
were actually different there
so this was a way to
go ahead and say well I'm going to move it back
and then I'm only going to change those
10, 20, whatever percent
tiles there and that meant
that it was essentially five times
faster than if you were redrawing all of the
tiles and that worked well enough
for us to do a bunch of these games
for Gamers Edge
we had a lot of these scrolling games like
Slurnax and Shadow Knights and things like
that that we were cranking out at this high
rate that had this scrolling effect on it
and it worked well enough there were design
challenges there where
if you made the worst case if you made a
report over the entire screen
you scroll over one and every single tile
changes and your frame rate is now five frames
per second because it had to redraw everything
so the designers had a little bit
that they had to worry about they had to make
these relatively plain looking levels
but it was still pretty magical
it was something that we hadn't seen before
and
the first thing that we wound up doing
with that was I had just gotten this
working and Tom Hall
was sitting there with me and
we were looking over at our Super Nintendo
on the side there with Super Mario
3 running and we had
the technology we had the
tools set up there and we stayed up all night
and we basically cloned
the first level of Super Mario Brothers
performance wise as well
and so it and we had our little character
running and jumping in there it wasn't
it was close to pixel accurate as far as
all the backgrounds and everything
but the gaming was just stuff that we cobbled
together from previous games that I had
written I just kind of like really
kick bash the whole thing together to make this demo
and that was one of the rare cases
when I said I don't usually do
these all night programming things
there's probably only two memorable ones
that I can think about you know one
was the all nighter to go ahead and get
I am to get our dangerous Dave
and copyright infringement is how we
titled it because we had a game called dangerous Dave
was you know running around with the shotgun shooting
things I and we were
just taking our most beloved game at the time
there the Super Mario 3
and sort of sticking Dave inside that
with this new scrolling technology that
was going perfectly smooth for
I am you know for them
as it ran and Tom
and I just kind of blurrily the next morning
you know kind of left and we left
a disc on I you know on the
desk for John Romero and Jay Wilbur
to see and just said run this
and we eventually made it back in
later in the day and
it was you know like they grabbed
us and pulled us in you know pulled us
into the room and that was the point where
they were like we got to do something
with this you know we're we're going to make
a company we're going to go make our own
games where this was something that
we we were able to just kind of hit them
with a hammer of an experience like wow
this is just like so much cooler than
what we thought was possible
there and initially we tried
to get Nintendo to to let us make
Super Mario 3 on the PC
that's really what we wanted to do we're like
hey we can finish this it's line
of sight for this will be great
and we sent something to Nintendo
and we heard that it did get looked at
in Japan and they just
weren't interested in that
but that's another one of those life could have gone
a very different way where we could have been
like Nintendo's house PC team
you know at that point
and defined the direction of
you know
Wolfenstein
and Doom and Quake
has been a Nintendo creation
yeah so at the same time
that we were just doing our first scrolling
demos I'm
we reached out to Scott Miller at
Apigee and said it's like hey we do
want to make some games you know these things
that you think you want those are those are nothing
what do you see what we can actually do now this
is going to be amazing and
he just like popped right up and sent a check
to us where we at that point
we still thought he might be a fraud that
he was just lying about all of this but he
was totally correct on how much money
he was making with his shareware titles
and this was his
his kind of real brainstorm about this
where shareware was this idea
that software doesn't have a fixed price
if you use it you send out of the goodness
of your heart some money to the creator
and there were a couple utilities
that did make some significant success
like that but for the most part
it didn't really work you know there wasn't
much software in a pure shareware
model that that was successful
the apogee
innovation was to
take something call it shareware
split it into three pieces you always made a trilogy
and you would
put the first piece out but then you buy
the whole trilogy for
some shareware amount which in reality
it meant that the first part was a demo
where you kind of like the demo went
everywhere for free and you paid money to
to get the whole set but
it was still played as shareware and we were
happy to have the first one go everywhere
and it wasn't a crippled demo where the
first episode of all these trilogies
it was a real complete game and probably
20 times as many people
played that part of it thought they had a great game
had found memories
of it but never paid us a dime
but enough people
were happy with that where
it was really quite successful and these
early games that we didn't think very much
of compared to commercial quality
games but they were doing really good
business some fairly crude
things and people it was good
business people enjoyed it and
it wasn't like you were taking a crapshoot on what
you were getting you just played a third of the
experience and you loved it enough
to hand write out a check
and put it in an envelope and address it
and send it out to Apogee
to get the rest of them so
it was a really pretty feel good
business prospect there because
everybody was happy
you know they knew what they were getting
when they send it in and they would send in
mail if you're going to the trouble of addressing
a letter and I am filling out
an envelope you write something in it and
there were just the literal bags of fan mail
for the shareware
games so people loved them
I should mention that for you
the definition of wealth is being
able to have pizza
whenever you want for me
there was a dream
that would play shareware games over
and over the part that's free
over and over and it was very
deeply fulfilling experience but
I dreamed of a time where
I could actually afford
the full experience and this is kind of this
dreamland beyond
the horizon when you could
find out what else is there
in some sense
even just playing the shareware
was
the limitation of that
life is
limited eventually we all die
in that way shareware was
like
somehow really fulfilling
to have this kind of mysterious thing
beyond what's free
always there it's kind of
I don't know that maybe
it's because a part of my childhood is playing
shareware games that was a really fulfilling
experience it's so interesting how that model
still brought joy
to so many people the 20x
people that played it I felt very good about
that I would run into people it's like
that would say oh I loved that game
that you had early on Commander Keen
whatever and
and no they meant just the first
episode that they got to see everywhere
that's me I played the crap out of Commander Keen
and that was all good
yeah
so we were in this position where Scott Miller
was just fronting us cash and saying yeah
make a game but
we did not properly
pull the trigger and say alright
we're quitting our jobs we were like
we're gonna do both we're gonna keep working
at soft disk working on this
and then we're going to go ahead
and make a new game for
Apogee at the same time
and this eventually did lead to some legal
problems and we had we had trouble
it all got worked out in the end but
it was not a good call at the time
there and your legal mind at the time was not
stellar
you you were not thinking
in terms of the illegal no I
I definitely wasn't none of us were
I and in hindsight
yeah it's like how did we think we were going to get away
with like even using our work computers
to write write software for
you know our our breakaway
new company it was
not a good plan how did Commander
Keen come to be
so the design process
we would start from we had some idea of what
we wanted to do we wanted to do a
Mario like game it was going to be a side
scroller I was going to use the technology
we we had some sense
of what it would have to look like because of the limitations
of this adaptive tile refresh
technology it had to have
fields of relatively constant tiles
you couldn't just paint up a background
and then move that around
I the early design
or all the design for Commander Keen really came
from Tom Hall where
he was
the main creative mind
for the early in software stuff
where we had an interesting division of things where
Tom was
all creative and design I was all
programming John Romero was an interesting
bridge where he was both a very good
programmer and also very good designer
and artist and kind of straddled
between the areas but Commander
Keen was very much Tom Hall's baby
and
he came up with all the design and
backstory for the different things of kind of
a mad scientist little kid
with I am
building a rocket ship and a zap gun
and visiting alien worlds
and doing all this that the
background that we lay the game inside
of and there's not
a whole lot to any of these things you know
design for us was always just what we
needed to do to make the game that was
going to be so much fun to play
and we made our we laid out
our first trilogy of games you know
the shareware formula it's going to be
three pieces we make Commander Keen one
two and three and we just really
started
busting on all that work and it went together
really quickly it was like three months
and it was something that while we were
still making games every month
for Gamers Edge we were sharing
technology between that I'd write a bunch
of code for this and we just kind of use it
for both again not a particularly good
idea there that had consequences for us
but
in three months we got our first our
first game out and all of a sudden it
was three times as successful as
the most successful thing Apogee had had
before and we were making like $30,000
a month
from the Commander Keen stuff
and that was again a surprise
to us it was more than we thought that
was going to that that was going to make
and we said well we're going to certainly
roll into another set of titles
from this and in that three months
I had come up with a much better way
of doing the scrolling technology that
was not the adaptive tile refresh
which in some ways was even simpler
and these things
so many of the great ideas of technology
are things that are back at the envelope
designs I make this comment
about modern machine learning where
all the things that are really important
practically in the last decade are each
of them fits on the back of an envelope
there are these simple little things
they're not super dense hard to
understand technologies
and so the the second scrolling
trick was just a matter of like
okay we know we've got this 64k
window
and the question was always like well you could
make a 2x2 but you can't
go off the edge
but I finally asked well what actually
happens if you just go off the
edge if you take your start
and you say it's like okay
I can move over I'm scrolling I can move
over I can move down I'm scrolling
I get to what should be the bottom of the memory
window it's like well what if I just
keep going and I say I'm going to start
at you know what happens if I start
at FFFE at the very
end of the 64k block
and it turns out it just
wraps back around to the top of the block
and I'm like oh well this makes
everything easy you can just scroll
the screen everywhere and all you have to draw
is just one new line of tiles
which everything you expose it might be
unaligned off various parts
of the screen memory
but it just works that no longer
had the problem of you had to have fields
of the similar colors because
it doesn't matter what you're doing you could be
having a completely unique world
and you're just drawing the new strip
that comes on but it might be
like you said unaligned
so it can be all over the place and it turns out
it doesn't matter I would have two page flipped
screens as long as they didn't overlap they moved
in series through this
two dimensional window of graphics
and that was one of those like well
this is so simple this just
this just works it's faster
I am there it seemed like there was no
downside funny thing was
I it turned out after we shipped
titles with this there were
what they called super VGA
cards the cards that would allow higher
resolutions and I and
different features that the standard ones didn't
and on some of those
cards this was a weird
compatibility cork again because nobody thought
this was not what it was designed to do
and some of those cards had more
memory they had more than just
256k in four planes they had
512k or a megabyte
and on some of those cards
I scroll my window down
and then it goes into uninitialized
memory that actually exists there
rather than wrapping back around at the top
and then
I was in the tough position of do I have to
track every single one of these and it was a mad
house back then with there were
20 different video card vendors with
all slightly different implementations of
their non standard functionality
so either I needed to natively
program all of the the VGA
cards there to
map in that memory and keep scrolling
down through all of that or I kind
of punted and took the easy solution
of when you finally did run to the
edge of the screen I accepted
a hitch and just copied the whole screen up
there so on some of those
those cards it was
a compatibility mode in the normal ones
when it all worked fine everything was just
beautifully smooth but if you had one of those
cards where it did not wrap the way
I wanted it to you'd be
scrolling around scrolling around and
then eventually you'd have a little hitch where
200 milliseconds or something
that was not super smooth as it
froze a little bit and this was the binary
thing is it one of the standard
screens or isn't one of the weird ones
the super VGA one yeah okay
and so we would default to and I think
that was one of those that changed over
the kind of course of deployment where
early on we would have a normal mode
and then you would have you would enable the compatibility
flag if your screen did this crazy
flickery thing when you got to a certain
point in the game and then
later I think it probably got enabled by default
as just more and more of the cards
I kind of did not do exactly
the right thing and that's the two edge
sword of doing unconventional
things with technology where
you can find something that nobody thought about
doing that kind of scrolling trick when they
set up those cards but
the fact that nobody thought that was the primary reason
when I was relying on that then
I wound up being broken on some of the later
cards let me take a bit
of a tangent but
ask you about the hacker
ethic because you mentioned shareware
it's an interesting world
the world of people
that make money
business and the people that
build systems the engineers
and
what is the hacker
ethic you've been a man
of the people and you've
embodied at least the part of that
ethic what does it mean
what did it mean to you at the time what does it mean to
you today so Steven Levy's
book hackers was a really
formative book for me as a teenager
I mean I read it several
times and there was
all of the great lore of the early
MIT era of hackers
ending up at the end with
it kind of went through the early
MIT hackers and the Silicon Valley
hardware hackers and then
the game hackers in part 3
and at that time as a teenager
I really
was kind of bitter in some ways
I thought I was born too late
I thought I missed the window
there and I really thought I
belonged in that third section of that
book with the game hackers and they were talking
about the Williams at Sierra
and Origin Systems with Richard Garriott
and it's like
I really wanted to be there
and I knew that was now
a few years in the past it was
not to be
but the early days
early MIT hacker days talking
a lot about this sense of
the hacker ethic that there was this sense
that it was about
sharing information being good
not keeping it to yourself and
that it's not a zero sum game
that you can share something
with another programmer and it doesn't
take it away from you
you then have somebody else doing something
and I also think that there's
an aspect of it where it's
this ability to take
joy in other people's accomplishments
where it's not the cutthroat bit of
like I have to be first I have to be
recognized as the one
that did this in some way but
being able to see somebody else
do something and say holy shit that's amazing
you know and just taking joy
in the ability of something amazing
that somebody else does
and the
big thing that I was able to do
through in software was
this ability to eventually release the source code
for most of our like all of our really
seminal game titles and that
was a it was a stepping stone
process where we were
kind of surprised early on where
people were able to
hack the existing games and of course I had
experience with that I remember hacking my copies
of Ultima so I give myself you know
9999 gold and raise my levels
and you know break out the sector editor
and so I was familiar with all of that
so it was just it was with a smile
when I started to see people doing that to our
games I am you know making
level editors for Commander Keen
or hacking up Wolfenstein 3D
but I made
the pitch internally
that we should actually release our own
tools for like what we did
what we used to create the games
and that was you know that was
a little bit debatable about
well you know will this let other will
give people a leg up it's always like what's that
going to mean for the competition
but the really hard pitch
was to actually release the full
source code for the games
and it was a balancing act with
the other people inside the company
where it's
interesting how the programmers
generally did get
certainly I am the people
that I worked closely with they did kind of
get that hacker ethic bit where
you wanted to share your code you were
you were proud of it you wanted other people to take it
do cool things with it
but interestingly
the broader
game industry is a little more
hesitant to embrace that than
like the group of people that we happen to have
at id software where it was
always a little interesting to me seeing how
a lot of people in the game modding
community were very possessive
of their code they did not want to share their
code they wanted it to be theirs it was their
you know claim to fame and that
was much more like what we tended
to see with artists where you know the
artists understand something about credit
and I you know wanting it to be known
as their work and a lot of the
game programmers
felt a little bit more like artists
than like hacker programmers in that it was
about building something that
maybe felt more like art to them than
the more tool based and
exploration based kind of
hacking culture side of things
it's so interesting that this kind of
fear that credit will not be
sufficiently attributed to you
and that's one of the things that I do
bump into a lot because
I try not
to go I mean it's easy for
me to say because so much credit is heaped on
me for the id software side of
things but when people come up and
they want to pick a fight and say no it's
like that wasn't where first person gaming
came from and you can point to
you know you can point to some of like things
on obscure titles that I was never aware
of or like the old Play Doh systems
or you know each personal computer
had something that was 3D
and moving around and I'm
you know and I'm happy to say it's like no
I mean I saw Battlezone and Star Wars
in the arcades I had seen 3D graphics
I had seen all these things they're
standing on the shoulders of lots of other people
but sometimes these examples they pull out
like I didn't know that existed I mean
there I had never heard of that before
then that didn't contribute to
what I made but there's plenty of stuff that
did and you know I
I think there's good cases to be made
that obviously Doom and Quake
and Wolfenstein were formative examples
for what
everything that came after
that but I don't feel
the need to go fight and say claim
primacy or initial invention
of anything like that but a lot of people
do want to. I think when you fight
for the credit in that way
and it does go against the hacker ethic
you destroy
something fundamental about the culture, about the
community that builds cool stuff
I think credit ultimately
so
I had this
sort of there's a famous
wrestler and freestyle wrestling
called
and he always preached
that you should just focus
on the art of the wrestling
and let people
write
your story however they want
the
the highest form of the art is just
focusing on the art and that's something
that is something about the
hacker ethic is just
focus on building cool stuff
sharing it with other cool people
and credit will get
assigned correctly
in the long arc of history
and I generally think that's true
and you've got
you know like there's some things
there's a graphics technique that got labeled
car max reverse
literally named it and it turned out
that I wasn't the first person to figure
that out like most scientific
things or mathematical things you might have
like oh this other person had actually done that
somewhat before and then there's
things that get attributed to me like the inverse
square root hack that I actually didn't
do I flat out that wasn't me and it's like
it's weird how the memetic power
of the internet I cannot
convince people of that
everything just gets attributed to you now
even though you've never
sought that the credit of things
I mean but part
of the fact that the humility behind
that is what attracts the
attributions
let's talk about a game
you mean one of the greatest games ever made
I know you could talk about doing quake
and so on but to me Wolfenstein 3D was like
whoa
it blew my mind
that a world like this could exist so
how did Wolfenstein 3D come to be
in terms of the programming
in terms of the design in terms of some of the
memorable technical challenges
and also
actually just something you haven't mentioned
you know
how did these ideas
come to be
inside your mind the adaptive
side scrolling so
the solutions to these technical challenges
so I usually can
introspectively pull back
pretty detailed
accounts of how technology solutions
and design choices on my part
came to be where
technically we had done two games
3D games like that before
where hover tank was the first one
which had flat shaded walls
but did have the scaled enemies inside it
and then catacombs 3D
which had textured walls
scaled enemies and
some more
some more functionality like the
disappearing walls and some other stuff
but what's really interesting from a
game development standpoint is
those games catacombs 3D
hover tank and Wolfenstein
they literally used
the same code for
a lot of the character behavior that a 2D
game that I had made earlier called catacombs
did where
it was an overhead view game kind of like gauntlet
you're running around and you can open up doors
pick up items basic game stuff
and the thought was
that this exact same
game experience just
presented in a different perspective
it could be literally the same game
just with a different view into it
would have a dramatically different
impact on the players
so it wasn't
a true 3D you're saying that
you can kind of take it
you can scale enemies meaning things that are
farther away you can make them smaller
so from the game was
a 2D map like all of our games
use the same tool for creation
we use the same map editor for creating
keen as Wolfenstein and
hevertank and catacombs and all this stuff
so the game was a 2D grid
made out of blocks and you
could say well these are walls these are where
the enemies start then they start moving around
and these early games like catacombs
you played it strictly in a 2D view
it was a scrolling 2D view
and that was kind of using an adaptive tile refresh
at the time to be able to do something
like that and then
the thought that these early
games all it did was take the same
basic enemy logic but
instead of seeing it from the god's eye view
on top you were inside it
and turning from side to side yawing
your view and moving forwards and backwards
and side to side and
it's a striking thing where you always talk
about wanting to isolate and factor changes
in values and this was one of those
most pure cases there where
the rest of the game changed very little
it was our normal kind of change the colors
on something and draw a different picture
for it but it's kind of the same thing
but the perspective changed in a really
fundamental way and
it was dramatically different
I can remember the reactions
where the artist Adrian
that had been drawing the pictures for
we had a cool big troll thing in catacombs 3D
and we had these walls
that you could get a key and you could make
the blocks disappear and really simple stuff
blocks could either be there or not there
so our idea of a door was
being able to make a set of blocks just disappear
and I remember the reaction
when he had drawn these characters and he was slowly
moving around and people
had no experience with 3D navigation
it was all still keyboard, we didn't even have mice
set up at that time
but slowly moving, going up
picked up a key, go to a wall
the wall disappears in a little animation
and there's a monster right there
and he practically fell out of his chair
and games just
didn't do that
the games were the gods eye view
you were a little invested in your little guy
you know, happy or sad when things
happened but you just did not get that
kind of startle reaction
something in your face, something in the back of your brain
some reptile brain thing
is just going oh shit, something just happened
and that was one of those
early points where it's like yeah
this is going to make a difference
this is going to be powerful and it's going to matter
were you able to imagine that
in the idea stage or no
so not that exact thing
so again, we had cases
like the arcade games battle zone
and star wars that you could kind of
see a 3D world and things coming at you
and you get some sense of it
but nothing had done the kind
of worlds that we were doing and the sort of
action based things, 3D
at the time was
really largely about the simulation
thoughts and this is something
that really might have
trended differently if not for
the id software approach in the games
where there were flight simulators
there were driving simulators
you had like hard drive in
and Microsoft flight simulator
and these were doing 3D and general purpose
3D in ways that were
more flexible than what we were doing with our
games but they were looked at as
simulations, they weren't trying to
necessarily be fast or responsive
or letting you do
kind of exciting maneuvers
because they were trying to simulate reality
and they were taking their cues from the big systems
the Evans in Sutherland and the silicon
graphics that were doing things
but we were taking our cues from
the console and arcade games
we wanted things that were
sort of quarter eaters that were doing fast
pace things that you could smack you around
rather than just smoothly gliding you
from place to place
quarter eaters
and you know a funny thing is
so much that that built into us
that Wolfenstein still had
lives and you had like one of the biggest power ups
in all these games like was an extra life
because you started off with 3 lives
and you lose your lives and then it's game over
and there weren't save games in
most of this stuff
it sounds almost crazy to say this
but it was an innovation in DOOM
to not have lives
you could just play DOOM as long as you wanted
you just restart at the start of the level
and why not?
we aren't trying to take people's quarters
they've already paid for the entire game
we want them to have a good time
and you would have some
I think that there's something to the epic journey
of making it to the end having to restart
all the way from the beginning after a certain number
of tries but now more fun is had
when you just let people kind of keep trying
when they're stuck rather than having to go
all the way back and learn different things
so you've recommended the
game engine black book Wolfenstein 3D
for technical exploration of the game
so looking back
30 years
what are some memorable technical innovations
that made this perspective
shift into this world that's
so immersive that scares you when a monster appears
or some things you have to solve?
so one of the interesting things
that come back to the theme of
deadlines and resource constraints
the game catacombs 3D
we shipped
we were supposed to be shipping this for gamers edge
on a monthly cadence and I had
slipped I was actually
late it slipped like six weeks because
this was texture mapped walls
doing stuff that I hadn't done before
and
at the six week point it was
still kind of glitchy and buggy
there were things that I knew that
if you had a wall that was like almost edge
on you could slide over to it and you could
see some things freak out or vanish or not
work and I hated that
I but I was up against
the wall we had to ship the game
it was still a lot of fun to play it was
novel nobody had seen it it gave you that
startle reflex I reaction
so it was worth shipping
but it had these things that I knew
were kind of flaky and janky and not
not what I was really proud of
so one of the
things that I did very differently in Wolfenstein
I was
I went catacombs used
almost a conventional
thing where you had segments that were
one dimensional polygons basically that were
clipped and back faced
and done kind of like a very crude
3D engine from the professionals
but I wasn't getting it done
right I was not doing a good
enough job I didn't really have line of sight
to fix
it right there's stuff that of course I look back
it's like oh it's obvious how to do this do
the math right do your clipping right
check all of this how you handle the precision
but I did not know how to do that
at that time and I the first 3D
engine you wrote catacombs 3D
you know hover tank had been a little bit before that
but that had the flat shaded walls so
the texture mapping on the walls was what
was bringing in some of these challenges
that was that was hard for me
and I couldn't solve it right at the time
can you describe what flat shading is in texture mapping
so in the the walls were
solid color one of 16 colors
I am in hover tank
so that's easy it's fast you just
draw the solid color for everything
texture mapping is what we all see
today where you have an image that is
stretched and distorted onto the walls
or the surfaces that you're working with
I am and it was
you know it was a long time for me to just figure
out how to do that without it
distorting in the wrong ways
and I did not get it all
exactly right in catacombs and I
had these flaws
so that was important enough to me
that rather than continuing to bang my head
on that when I wasn't positive I was
going to get it I went with a completely
different approach for drawing
for figuring out where the walls were
which was a ray casting approach
which I had done in catacombs 3D
I had a bunch of C code
I was going to make this work right and it wasn't
working right in Wolfenstein
I wound up going to a very
small amount of assembly code
so in some ways they should be
a slower way of doing it
but by making it a smaller amount of work
that I could more tightly optimize
it worked out and Wolfenstein 3D
was just absolutely rock solid
you know it was you know nothing
glitched in there the game just was
pretty much flawless through all of that
and I was super proud of that
but eventually like in the later games
I went back to the more span based
things where I could get more total efficiency
once I really did figure out
how to do it so there were two
sort of key technical things to Wolfenstein
one was this ray casting approach
which you still to this day
you see people go and say let's
write a ray casting engine because
it's an understandable way of doing things
that lets you make games very much
like that so you see raycasters in
javascript raycasters in python
people that are basically going
and re implementing that
approach to taking a tiled world
and casting out into it
it works pretty well but it's not the fastest
way of doing it. Can you describe what ray casting is?
So you start off
and you've got your screen which is
320 pixels across at the time if you haven't
sized down the window for
greater speed and at every
pixel there's going to be an angle
you've got your position in the world
and you're going to just run along that angle
and keep going until you hit a block
so up to 320
times across there it's going to throw
cast array out into the world
from wherever your origin is
until it runs into a wall
and then it can figure out exactly where on the wall
it hits. The performance
challenge of that is as it's going out
every block it's crossing
it checks is this a solid wall
so that means that in
like the early Wolfenstein levels you're
in a small jail cell going out into a small
hallway it's super efficient for
that because you're only stepping across three
or four blocks but then if somebody
makes a room that covers our maps
we're limited to 64 by 64 blocks
if you made one room
that was nothing but walls at the far
space it would go pretty slow
because it would be stepping across
80 tile tests or something
along the way. By the way the physics of our
universe seems to be competing this very thing
so this maps nicely to the
actual physics of our world.
Yeah you get like I follow a little bit
of something like Stephen Wolfram's work on
you know interconnected network
information states of that and
that's it's beyond what I can
have an informed opinion on
but it's interesting that people are
considering things like that and have
and have things that can back
it up. Yeah
there's whole different sets of interesting stuff
there. So Wolfenstein 3D
had raycasting. So raycasting
and then the other kind of key aspect
was what I called compiled
scalars where the
idea of
you saw this in the earlier classic
arcade games like Space Harrier and stuff
where you would take a picture which is
normally drawn directly on the screen
and then if you have the ability to make
it bigger or smaller big chunky pixels
or physically small drop sampled
pixels that's the fundamental
aspect of what our characters
were doing in these 3D games you would have
it's just like you might have drawn a tiny little character
but now we can make them really big
and make them really small move it around
that was the limited kind of 3D
that we had for characters to make them
turn there were literally eight different views
of them you didn't actually have a 3D model
that would rotate you just had these cardboard
cutouts but that was good enough for that
startle fight reaction and
it was kind of what we had to deal
with there. So a straightforward
approach to do that you could just write
out your doubly nested loop of
you've got your stretch factor
and it's like you've got a point you stretch by a little
bit it might be on the same pixel it might
be on the next pixel might have skipped a pixel
you can write that out but it's
not gonna be fast enough where especially
you get a character for that right in
your face monster covering almost the
entire screen doing that with a
general purpose scaling routine
would have just been much too slow it would have
worked when they're small characters but then it would get
slower and slower as they got closer to you
until right at the time when you most care
about having a fast reaction time
the game would be chunking down
so the fastest possible
way to draw pixels
at that time was to
I am
instead of saying I've got a general
purpose I am
version that can handle any scale
I made I used
a program to make essentially
a hundred or more separate little
programs that was optimized for
I will take an image and I will draw it
12 pixels tall I'll take an image I'll
draw it 14 pixels tall
up by every two pixels even
for that so you would have the most
optimized code so that in
the normal case where
most of the world is fairly large
I like the pixels are big you know
we did not have a lot of memory so
in most cases that meant that you
would load a pixel color and then
you would store it multiple times
so that was faster
than even copying an image
in a normal conventional case because
most of the time the image is expanded
so instead of doing one read one
write for a simple copy you might
be doing one read and three or four writes
as it got really big and that had
the beneficial aspect of just when you
needed the performance most when things are covering
the screen it was giving you the most
acceleration for that by the way we
were able to
understand this through
thinking about it or were you testing like
the right speed and this again
comes back to I can
find the antecedents for things like this
so in I
back in the Apple 2 days
the graphics were
essentially single bits at a time
and if you wanted to make your
little spaceship if you wanted to make it
smoothly go across the world
if you just took the image and you drew it out at the next
location you would move by seven pixels
at a time so it would go chunk chunk chunk
if you wanted to make it move smoothly
you actually had to make seven versions
of the ship that were pre shifted
you could write a program that would shift it
dynamically but on a one megahertz
processor that's not going anywhere fast
so if you wanted to do a smooth
moving fast action game you made
separate versions of each of these
sprites now there were a few
more tricks you could pull that if it still
wasn't fast enough you could make
a compiled shape where
instead of this program
that normally copies an image
it says like get this byte from here
stored here get this byte store this byte
if you've got the memory space
you could say I'm going to write
the program that does nothing but draw
this shape it's going to be like
I'm going to load the immediate value
25 you know which is some
bit pattern and then I'm going to store
that at this location
rather than loading something from memory
that involve indexing registers
and this other slow stuff you could
go ahead and say no I'm going to hard code
the exact values of all of the image right
into the program and this was always
a horrible trade off there but you didn't have much
memory and you didn't have much speed
but if you had something that you wanted to go
really fast you could turn it into a program
and that was
you know knowing about that technique is what
made me think about some of these unwinding
it for the PC where people
that didn't come from that background were less
likely to think about that
I mean there's some deep parallels
probably to human cognition as well
there's something about
optimizing
and compressing
the
the processing of a new information that
requires you to predict the possible
ways in which
the game or the world
might unroll and you have
something like compiled scalars always
there so you have like
optimum like you have a prediction
of how the world will unroll and you have
some kind of optimized
data structure
for that prediction and then you can modify
if the world turns out to be different
you can modify in a slight way.
As far as building out techniques so much of the brain
is about the associative context
you know there just when you learn something
it's in the context of something else
and you can have faint tiny little
hints of things and I do think there are
some deep things around
like sparse distributed memories and boosting
that's like if you can just be slightly above the noise
floor of having some hint of something
you can have things refined into
pulling the memory back up so
having a being a programmer and having a
toolbox of like all of these things that
things that I did in all of these previous
lives of programming tasks that
still matters to me about how I'm
able to pull up some of these things like in that
case it was something I did on the Apple
to then being relevant for the PC
and I have still cases
when I would when I would work on mobile
development then be like okay I did
something like this back in the
the doom days but now it's a different
environment but I still had that tie
I can bring it in and I can transform it
into what the world needs right now
and I do think that's actually one of the
very core things with human cognition
and brain like I you know brain
like functioning is finding
these ways about you've got your brain is
kind of everything everywhere all at once
you know it's it is just a set of all of this
stuff that is just fetched back by these
queries that go into it and they can
just be slightly above the noise floor
with random noise in your neurons and synapses
that are affecting exactly what gets pulled
up so you're saying some of these very
specific solutions for different
games you find
that there's a kernel of an a deep
idea that's generalizable to other
to other things yeah you can't
predict what it's going to be but that
idea of like I called out that compiled
shaders in the forward that I wrote
for that the game engine black book
as you know this is it's
kind of an endpoint of unrolling
code but that's one of those things
that thinking about that and having that
in your mind and I'm sure there are some
programmers that you know hear about that
think about it a little bit it's kind of the
mind blown moment it's like oh you can
just turn all of that data into code
and nowadays you know you have instruction
cash issues and that's not necessarily the
best idea but there are different
it's an idea that has power
and has probably relevance in some other
areas maybe it's in a hardware point of
view that there's a way you approach
building hardware that has that same
you don't even have to think about iterating
everything all the way into it in one
place what is the story
of how you came to program doom
what is some memorable technical
challenges or innovations within that game
so the path that we went
after after Wolfenstein
got out and we were on this crazy
arc where keen one through three
more success than we thought keen
four through six even more success
Wolfenstein even more success so we
were on this this crazy trajectory
for things so actually our first
box commercial project was a commander
keen game but then
Wolfenstein was going to have a game
Spear of Destiny which was
a commercial version 60 new levels
so the rest of the team took the game
engine pretty much as it was
and started working on that we got
new monsters but it's
basically reskins of the things
there there's a really interesting aspect
about that that I didn't appreciate until much
much later about how
Wolfenstein clearly did
tap out its limit about
what you want to play
all the levels and a couple of our license
things there was a hard
creative wall that you did not really
benefit much by continuing to beat on it
but a game
like doom and other more modern
games like Minecraft or something
there's kind of a turing completeness level
of design freedom that you get in games
that Wolfenstein clearly sat on one
side of you know all the creative
people in the world could not go and do
a masterpiece just with the technology
that Wolfenstein had Wolfenstein
could do Wolfenstein but you really couldn't
do something crazy and different
but it didn't take that much more capability
to get to Wolfenstein with
the freeform lines and
a little bit more artistic freedom to get
to the point where people still announce
new doom levels today all these
years after without having completely
tapped out the creativity how did you
put it touring complete
design space design space
like you know we have the kind of
computational universality
on a lot of things and for creativity
but yeah there's things where
a box can be too small
but above a certain point
you kind of are at the point where
you really have almost
unbounded creative ability there and doom
was the first time you crossed
that line yeah where there were
thousands of doom levels created
and some of them still have something new
and interesting to say to the world about it
that line
can you introspect what that line
was is in the design space
is it something about the programming
capabilities that you were able
to add to the game
so the graphics fidelity
was a necessary part because the block
limitations in Wolfenstein
what we had right there
was not enough
the full scale blocks although
Minecraft I really did show that
perhaps blocks stacked
in 3D and at one quarter
the scale of that one eighth in volume
is then sufficient to have all
of that but the wall
sized blocks that we had in Wolfenstein
was too much of a creative limitation
we licensed the technology to a few other teams
none of them made
too much of a dent with that
it just wasn't enough creative ability
but a little bit more whether
it was the variable floors and ceilings
and arbitrary angles in doom
or the smaller
blocks in Minecraft
is then enough to open it up to
worlds and worlds of new capabilities
what is binary space
partitioning
which is one of the technologies
jump around a little bit
on the story path there
so while the team was working on
Spirit Destiny for Wolfenstein
we had met another development team
Raven Software while we were in Wisconsin
and
they had RPG background
and I still kind of love that
and I offered to do a game engine
for them to let them do
a 3D rendered RPG
instead of the like most RPG games
were kind of hand drawn they made it look
kind of 3D but it was done just all with
artist work rather than a real engine
and
after Wolfenstein this was still a tile
based world but I added floors and ceilings
and some lighting and the ability to have
some sloped floors in different areas
and that was my intermediate step for a game called
Lancaster
and it had slowed down enough
it was not fast enough to do our type
of action things so they had the screen
cropped down a little bit so
you couldn't go the full screen width
like we would try to do in Wolfenstein
but I learned a lot
I got the floors and ceilings and lightings and it looked great
they were great artists up there
and it was an inspiration for us to look at
some of that stuff
but I had learned enough from that
that I had the plan for
faster ways to do the lighting
and shadowing and I wanted to do this freeform
geometry I wanted to break out of this tile
based 90
degree world limitations
so we had that was
when we got our next stations and we were working
with these higher powered systems
and we built
an editor that let us draw kind of arbitrary
line segments and I was working hard
to try to make something that could
render this fast enough
I was pushing myself
pretty hard
and we were at a point where
we could see some things that looked amazingly cool
but it wasn't really fast enough
for the way I was doing it
for this flexibility it was no longer
I couldn't just raycast into it
and I had these very complex sets of lines
and simple little worlds were okay
but the cool things that we wanted to do
just weren't quite fast enough
and I wound up taking a break
at that point and I did
the port I did two ports
of
our games I
Wolfenstein to the
Super Nintendo it was a
crazy difficult thing to do
which was an even slower processor
a couple megahertz processor
and
it had been this whole thing where we had farmed out
the
work and it wasn't going well
and I took it back over
and trying to make it go fast
on there where it really
did not have much processing power
the pixels were stretched up hugely
and it was pretty ugly when you looked at it
but in the end it did come out fast enough
to play and still be kind of fun from that
but that was where I started
using BSP trees or binary
space partitioning trees it was one of those things
I had to make it faster
there it was a stepping stone
where it was reasonably easy to understand
in the grid world of Wolfenstein
where it was all still 90 degree angles
BSP trees were
I eased myself into
it with that and it was a big success
then when I came
back to working on Doom
I had this new tool in my toolbox
it was going to be a lot harder with the arbitrary
angles of Doom this was where
I really started grappling with epsilon
problems and just you know
up until that point I hadn't really had to deal with
the fact that I am
so many numeric things this almost felt like a betrayal
to me where people had told me that I had
mathematicians up on a bit of a pedestal
where I was
people think I'm a math wizard and I'm not
I really everything that I did
was really done with a solid
high school math understanding
you know algebra 2 trigonometry
and I am
that was what got me all the way through Doom and Quake
and all of that of just understanding
basics of matrices and
knowing it well enough to do something with it
what's the epsilon problems you ran into
so I when you wind up taking
a like a sloped line
you say I'm going to intersect it with another sloped
line I am
then you wind up with something that's not going to be
on these nice grid boundaries
with the Wolfenstein tile maps
all you've got is horizontal and vertical lines
looking at it from above and if you cut
one of them it's just obvious the other one gets cut
exactly at that point
but when you have angled lines you're doing
a kind of a slope intercept problem
and you wind up with rational numbers there
where things that are not going
to evenly land on an integer
or even on any fixed point value that you've got
so everything winds up having
to snap to some fixed point value
so the lines slightly change their
angle you wind up if you cut something
here this one's going to bend a little this way
and it's not going to be completely straight
and then you come down to all these questions of
well this one is a
point on an angled line
you can't answer that in finite
precision unless you're doing something
with actual rational numbers
and later on I did waste far too much
time chasing things like that how do you
do precise arithmetic with rational numbers
and it always blows up eventually
exponentially as you do
so these kind of things are impossible with computers
so they're possible
again there are paths to do
doing it but you can't fit them conveniently
in any of the numbers you need to start using
big nums and different
factor trackings of different things
so you have to if you have any
elements of OCD and you want to do something
perfectly you're screwed if you're working
with floating point yeah so
so you had to deal with this for the first
time and there were lots of challenges
there about like okay they built
this cool thing and the way the BSP
trees work is it basically
takes the walls and it carves other
walls by those walls in this clever
way that you can then take
all of these fragments and then you can
for sure from any given point
get an ordering of everything in the world
and you can say this goes in front of this
goes in front of this all the way back to
the last thing and that's super
valuable for graphics where
kind of a classic graphics
algorithm would be painter's algorithm
you paint the furthest thing first and then the next thing
and then the next thing and then it comes up
and it's all perfect for you that's
slow because you don't want to have to have drawn
everything like that but you can also flip
it around and draw the closest thing
to you and then if you're clever
about it you can figure out what you need
to draw that's visible beyond
that and that's what BSP trees allow you to
do. Yeah so it's combined with
a bunch of other things but it gives
you that ordering it's a clever way
of doing things and I remember
I had learned this from one of
my graphics bible at the time
a book called Folien Van Damme and I can't
it was a different world back there there was a small
integer number of books and
this book that yeah
this book that was it was big fat college
textbook that I had read
through many times I didn't
understand everything in it some of it wasn't
useful to me but they had the little
thing about
finite orderings of you draw a little t
shaped thing and you can say you can
you can make a fixed ahead of time order from
this and you can generalize this with
the BSP trees and I
got a little bit more information about that and
it was kind of fun later while I was working on
Quake I got to meet Bruce Nailer
who is one of the original researchers that
developed those technologies
for academic literature
and that was kind of fun but I was very much
finding a tool that can help me solve
what I was doing and I was using it in this
very crude way in a two dimensional fashion
rather than the general 3D the epsilon
problem got much worse in Quake
in three dimensionals when things angle in every
way but eventually I did sort
out the sort out how to do it reliably
on doom there were still a few
edge cases in doom that were not
absolutely perfect where
they even got terminologies in the
communities like when you got to something where it
was messed up it was a hall of mirrors effect
because you'd sweep by and it wouldn't draw
something there and you would just wind up with
the leftover remnants as you flipped
between the two pages
but BSP trees were important
for it but it's again worth noting
that after we did
doom our major competition
came from I'm Ken Silverman
his build engine which was used for Duke
Nukem 3D and some of the other games for
3D realms and he used a completely
different technology nothing to do with
I'm with BSP
trees so there's not just
a one true way of doing things
I'm there were critical things
about to make any of those games
fast you had to you had to separate
your drawing into you drew vertical lines
and you drew horizontal lines just
kind of changing exactly what you would
draw with them that was critical for
the technologies at that time
and like all the games that were
kind of like that wound up doing something
similar but there were still a bunch of other
decisions that could be made
and we made good enough decisions
on everything on doom
we brought in multiplayer
significantly and it was our first game
that was designed to be modified
by the user community where we had this
whole set up of our wad files
and pwads and things that people could
build with tools that we released to them
and they eventually rewrote to be better
than what we released but they could build
things and you could add it to your game
without destructively modifying it which
is what you had to do in all the early games
the data files are
the executable before while doom
was set up in this flexible way so
that you could just say run the normal
game with this added on on top and it
would overlay just the things
that you wanted to there
would you say that doom was kind of the
first true 3d game
that you created so no it's still
doom would usually be called a 2
and a half d game where it had
three dimensional points on it and this is
another one of these kind of pedantic things
that I love to argue about about what was
the first 3d game I still
like every month probably I hear from
somebody about well was doom really
a 3d game or something
and
I give the point where
characters had three coordinates
so you had like an x y and z the
cacodamon could be coming in very high
and come down towards you
the walls had three coordinates
on them so on some sense
it's a 3d game engine
not a fully general 3d game
engine you could not
build a pyramid in doom because
you couldn't make a sloped wall
which was slightly different where in
that previous shadow caster game I couldn't
have vertexes and have a sloped floor there
but the changes that I made for
doom to get higher speed and
a different set of flexibility traded away
that ability but you literally couldn't make
that you could not
make different heights
of passages but you could not make a bridge
over another area you could not
go over and above it so it still had
some 2d limitations to it
that's more about the building versus the actual
experience because the experiences
it felt like things would come at you but again
you couldn't look up either
you could only pitch
it was 4 degrees of freedom rather than
6 degrees of freedom you did not
have the ability to tilt your head this way
or pitch up and down so that takes us
to quake what was
the leap there
what was some fascinating
technical challenges and there were a lot
or not challenges but innovations
that you've come up with so quake was
kind of the first thing where
I did have to kind of come face
to face with my limitations
where it was the first thing where
I really did kind of give
it my all and still come up
you know come up a little bit short in terms
of what and when I wanted to
to get it done and the company
brand had some serious stresses
through the whole project
and we
bit off a lot so the things that we set out
to do was it was going to be
really a true 3D engine where
it could do 6 degree of freedom
you could have all the
viewpoints you could model anything
it had
a really remarkable new lighting
model with the surface caching
and things that was one of those where it was starting
to do some things that they weren't doing
even on the very high end systems
and it was going to be
completely programmable
in the modding standpoint where
the thing that you couldn't do and do
you could replace almost all of the media
but you couldn't really change the game
there were still some people
that were doing the hex setting of the executable
the dehacked things where you could change
a few things about rules and people made
some really capture the flag type things
by hacking the executable but
it wasn't really set out to do that
quake was going to have its own
language that the game was going to be implemented
and that would be able to be overwritten
just like any of the media
code was going to be data for that
and you would be able to have expansion
packs that changed fundamental things
and mods and so on
and the multiplayer
was going to be playable over the internet
it was going to support a client
server rather than peer to peer
so we had the possibility of supporting
larger numbers of players in disparate locations
with this full flexibility
of the programming overrides
with full six degree of freedom
modeling and viewing
and with this fancy new light map
kind of surface caching
side it was a lot and this was
one of those things that if I could
go back and tell
tell younger me to do something differently
it would have been to split those innovations
up into two phases
in two separate games. It will be phase one
and phase two. So it probably would have been
taking the doom rendering engine
and bringing in
the TCP IP client server
focusing on the multiplayer
and the Quake C
or would have been Doom C programming language there
so I would have split that into
programming language and networking
with the same doom engine
rather than forcing everybody to go towards
the Quake engine which really meant
getting a Pentium. While it ran on a 486
it was not a great experience there
we could have made more people happier
and gotten two games done
50% more time.
So speaking of people happier
or
mutual friend Joe Rogan
it seems like has the most
important moment of his life
has centered around Quake
so it was a definitive
part of his life
so would he agree with
your thinking that
they should split
so he is a person who loves Quake
and played Quake a lot
would he agree that you should have
done the doom engine
and focus on the multiplayer for phase 1
or
in your looking back
is the 3D world that Quake created
was also
fundamental to the
enriching experience. I would say that
what would have happened is
you would have had a
doom looking but Quake feeling
game
8 months earlier and then maybe
6 months after Quake actually
shipped then there would have been the full
running on a Pentium I am
6 degree of freedom, graphics engine type
things there so it's not that it wouldn't
have been there
it would have been something amazingly cool
earlier and then something even cooler
somewhat later where
I would much rather have gone and done
two 1 year development efforts
I've cycled them through
I've been a little more pragmatic about that
rather than killing us
ourselves on the whole Quake development
but I would say it's obviously
things worked out well in the end
but looking back and saying how would I
optimize and do things differently
that did seem to be a clear case where
I
going ahead and we had enormous momentum
on doom you know we did doom too
as the kind of commercial boxed version
after our shareware success
with the original but we could have just
made another doom game
adding those new features
in it would have been huge we would have
learned all the same lessons but faster
and it would have given
6 degree of freedom and Pentium
class systems a little bit more time
to get mainstream because we did
cut out a lot of people with the hardware
requirements for Quake
was there any dark moments for you personally
psychologically in having
having such harsh deadlines
and having this also made
difficult technical challenges
so I've never really
had
really dark black places I mean
I can't necessarily put myself in
anyone else's shoes but I understand
a lot of people
have you have significant
challenges with kind of their
mental health and well being and I've been
I've been super stressed
I've been you know unhappy as a teenager
in various ways but
I've never I've never really
gone to a very dark
place I just seem to be
largely
immune to what really
wrecks people I mean I've had plenty of time
when I'm very unhappy and miserable about
something but it's never
hit me like you know I believe
it winds up hitting some other people
I've borne up well under whatever
stresses have I
you know have kind of fallen on me and I've
always coped best on that
when all I need to do is
usually just kind of bear down on my work
I pull myself out of
whatever hole I might be slipping into
by actually making progress
I mean maybe if I was in a
position where I was never able to make
that progress I could have slid down further
but I've always been in a
place where okay a little bit
more work maybe I'm in a tough spot here
but I always know
if I just keep pushing eventually
I break through and I make progress I feel
good about what I'm doing
and that's been enough for me so
far in my life
Have you seen in the distance
like
you know ideas of depression
or contemplating suicide have you seen
those things far?
So it was interesting when I was a teenager
I was
probably on some level a troubled
youth I was unhappy most of my teenage
years I
wanted to be on my own doing
programming all the time as soon as I
was 18, 19 even though
I was poor I was doing exactly what I wanted
and I was very happy but high
school was not a great time for me
and I had
a conversation with like the school counselor
and they're kind of running their script it's like
okay it's kind of a weird kid here let's
carefully probe around it's like
you know do you ever think about ending
it all? I'm like no of course
not never not at all
this is temporary things are going to be better
and that's always been kind of the case
for me and obviously
that's not that way for everyone and other people
do react differently and
what was your escape
from the troubled youth
like
you know music
video games
books
how did you escape from
a world that's full of cruelty and suffering
and that's absurd? Yeah I mean I was
not you know I was not victim of cruelty
and suffering it's like I was an unhappy
somewhat petulant youth and you know in my
point where I you know I'm not
putting myself up with anybody else's
suffering but I was unhappy
objectively and
the things that I did that
very much characterized my childhood
were I had
books, comic books, dungeons and dragons,
arcade games, video games
like some of my fondest
childhood memories are the convenience stores
the 711s and quick trips because
they had a spinner rack of comic books
and they had a little side room with
two or three video games, arcade games
in it and that was
that was very much my happy place you know if I
could I get my comic books and
if I could go to a library and you know
go through those little 0 0
0 section where computer books were supposed
to be and there are a few sad little books there
but still just being able to sit down
and go through that and I read
you know I read a ridiculous number
of books both fiction and nonfiction
as a teenager and
you know as I my
my rebelling in high school was
just sitting there with my nose in a book ignoring
the class and through lots of it and
teachers had a range of reactions
to that some more
accepting of it than others
I'm with you on that so let
us return to quake for a bit with the technical
challenges what
everything together
from the networking
to the graphics
what are some things you remember
that were
innovations you had to come up with in order
to make it all happen
yeah so there were a bunch of things on quake
where on the one hand the idea
that I built my own programming language
to implement the game in
looking back and I try to tell people
it's like every every high level
programmer sometime in their career goes through
and they invent their own language it just seems to be a thing
that's pretty broadly done people
they're like I'm gonna go write a computer programming language
and
you know I don't regret having done it
but after that I switched
from quake C my quirky little
pseudo object orient or
entity oriented language there
quake 2 went back to using DLLs
with C and then quake 3
I implemented my own C interpreter or compiler
which was a much smarter thing to do
that I should have done originally for quake
but building my own language was
an experience I learned a lot from that
and then there was a generation
of game programmers that learned
programming with quake C which I feel kind
of bad about because
we give javascript a lot of crap but
quake C was nothing to
write home about there
but it allowed people to do
magical things you get into programming not
because you love the
BNF syntax of a language
it's because the language lets you do
something that you cared about and here's
very much you could do something
in a whole beautiful three dimensional world
and the idea and the fact that the code
for the game was out there you could say
I like the shotgun but I want
it to be more badass you go in there and say
okay now it does 200 points damage
and then you go around with a big grin
on your face blowing up monsters all over
the game so yeah it's
I you know it is not
what I would do today going back with that
language but that was a big part of it
learning about the networking stuff
I because it's
interesting where I learned these things by
reading books so I would get a book on networking
find something I
read all about and learn okay packets they can
be out of order
lost or duplicated these are all
the things that can theoretically happen to packets
so I wind up spending all this time
thinking about how do we deal about all that
and it turns out of course in the real world
those are things that yes theoretically can
happen with multiple routes but they really
aren't things that you're 99.999%
of your packets
have to deal with
so there was learning experiences about
lots of that like why
when TCP is appropriate
versus UDP and and how
if you do things in UDP you wind up reinventing
TCP badly in almost all cases
so you know there's
there's good arguments for using both
for different game technology
different parts of the game process transitioning
from level to level and all but the
the graphics were the showcase
of what what quake
was all about it was this graphics technology
that nobody had seen there
and it was a while before
you know there were competitive things out there
and it went a long
time internally really not working
where we were even building
levels where the game
just was not at all
shippable with large fractions of the world
like disappearing not being there
I or being really
slow in various parts of it and it
was this act of faith it's like
I think I'm gonna be able to fix this I think
I'm gonna be able to make this work
I'm and lots
of stuff changed where the level designers
would build something then have to throw it away
as something fundamental in the kind of
graphics or level technology changed
and the
I'm so there were two big things
that contributed to making it possible
at that time frame I am
two new things there was
certainly hardcore optimized low level
assembly language this is where
I had hired Michael a brash away from
Microsoft and he had been one of my
early inspirations where
that back in the soft disk days the library
of magazines that they had
some of my most treasured ones were
Michael a brash's articles
in Dr. Dobbs Journal and
it was it was amazing after
all of our success in doom we were able to
kind of hit him up and say hey we'd like you
to come work at id software and he was in
the senior technical role at Microsoft
and I am you know and
he was on track for and this was right when
Microsoft was starting to take off and I did
eventually
convince him that what we were doing
was going to be really amazing with quake it was
going to it was going to be something nobody
had seen before it had
these aspects of what we were talking
about we had metaverse talk back then
we had read snow crash and we
were we knew about this and
Michael was
big into the science fiction and we would talk
about all that and kind of spin this tail
and it was some of the same conversations
that we have today about the metaverse
about how you could have different areas
linked together by portals and you could have
user generated content and changing
out all of these things so you really
were creating the metaverse quaking
and we we talked about things like
philosophically advertised as a virtual
reality experience you know that was
the first wave of virtual reality was
in the late 80s and early 90s
you had like the lawnmower man
I'm you know movie and you had
time in newsweek talking about the early
VPL headsets and
of course that cratered so hard that
people didn't want to look at virtual reality
for decades afterwards where
it was just it was spoken
mirrors it was not real in the sense
that you could actually do something
real and valuable with it but
but still we had that kind of common
set of talking points and we were talking
about what these games could
I could become and how you'd
like to see people building all of these
creative things because we were seeing an
explosion of work with doom at that time
people were doing amazingly
cool things like we saw cooler
levels that we had built coming out of the
user community and then people finding
ways to you know change the characters
in different ways and it was great and we
knew what we were doing in quake was
removing those last things there
was some quirky things with a couple
of the data types that didn't work right
for overriding and then and then the
core thing about the programming model
and I was definitely going to hit all of
those in quake I'm
but the the graphics side of it was
it was still
I knew what I wanted to do
and it was one of these
hubris things where it's like well
so far I've been able to kind of
kick everything that I set out
to go do but quake
was definitely a little bit
more than could be comfortably chewed
at that point and
but Michael was one of the
one of the strongest programmers and
graphics programmers that I knew
and he was one of the people that I trusted
to to write assembly code
you know better than I could and there's
there's a few people that I can point to
about things like this where I'm a world
class optimizer I mean I make things
go fast but I recognize
there's a number of people that
can write tighter assembly code
tighter SIMD code or tighter CUDA code
then you know then I can write
I'm you know my best strengths
are a little bit more at the system
level I mean I'm good at all of that
but the most leverage comes
from making the decisions that are a little bit
higher up where you figure out
how to change your large scale problems
so that these lower level problems
are easier to do or it makes it possible
to do them in a
in a uniquely fast way
so most of my
you know my big wins in a lot of ways
from all the way from the early games through
you know through VR and the aerospace
work that I'm doing and did
and hopefully the AI work that I'm working on
now is finding an angle on something
that means you trade off
something that you maybe think
you need but it turns out you don't need
and by making a sacrifice in one place
you can get big advantages
in another place.
Is it clear at which level of the system
those big advantages
can be gained? It's not always
clear and that's why the thing that
that I try to make one of my core
values and I
proselytize to a lot of people is
trying to know the entire stack
you know trying to see through
everything that happens and it's almost
impossible on like the web browser
level of things where there's so many levels
to it but you should at least understand
what they all are even if you can't understand
all the performance characteristics at
each level but it goes all the way
down to literally the hardware
so what does the what is this
chip capable of and
what is this software that you're writing capable
of and then with this architecture you put
on top of that then the ecosystem around
it all the people that are
working on it so there are
all these decisions and
they're never made in a globally optimal way
but sometimes you can drive
a thread of global optimality through it
you can't look at everything it's too complicated
but sometimes you can step
back up and make a different
decision and we kind of went through this on the
graphic side on Quake where
in some ways it was kind of bad where
Michael would spend his time
writing like I'd rough out
the basic routines like okay here's our
span rasterizer and he would spend
a month writing this
beautiful cycle optimized
piece of assembly language that
does what I asked
it to do and he did it faster than
my original code would do or probably
what I would be able to do even if I had spent
that month on it but then
we'd have some cases when I'd be like
okay well I figured out at this
higher level instead of drawing these in
a painter's order here I do a span
buffer and it cuts out
30% or 40% of all
of these pixels but it means you need to
rewrite kind of this interface of all of
that and I could tell that wore on him a
little bit but in the end it was
it was the right thing to do where we wound up
changing that rasterization
approach and we wound up with a super optimized
assembly language
core loop and then a good
system around it which minimized how much
that had to be called
in order to be able to do this kind of system
level thinking whether we're talking
about game development
aerospace
nuclear energy
AI
VR you have to be able to
understand the hardware
the low level software
the high level software the design
decisions the whole thing the full
stack of it. Yeah and that's where
a lot of these things become possible
when you're really when you're bringing
the future forward I mean there's a pace
that everything just kind of glides towards
where we have a lot of progress that's happening
at such a different so many different ways
you kind of slide towards progress just
left to your own programs just get faster
for a while it wasn't clear if they were
going to get fatter more than they get
quicker than they get faster and it cancels out
but it is clear now in retrospect now
programs just get faster and have gotten
faster for a long time
but if you want to do something like back
of that original talking about
scrolling games say what this needs to
be five times faster well
we can wait six years
and just it'll naturally get that much
faster at that time
or you come up with some really clever way of
doing it so there are those
opportunities like that in a whole bunch
of different areas now
most programmers don't need to be
thinking about that there's not that many
you know there's a lot of opportunities for
this but it's not everyone's work a day type
stuff so everyone doesn't have to know
how all these things work they don't have
to know how their compiler works how
you know the processor chip manages
cache eviction and all these
low level things but
sometimes there are powerful opportunities
that you can look at and say
we can bring the future
five years faster
you know we can do something that wouldn't it be
great if we could do this well we can do
it today if we make a certain
set of decisions and
it is in some ways smoke and mirrors
where you say it's like doom was
a lot of smoke and mirrors where people
thought it was more capable than it actually
was but we picked the right
smoke and mirrors to deploy in the game
where by doing this
people will think that it's more general
we're gonna amaze them with what they've got here
and they won't notice
that it doesn't do these other things
so smart decision making
at that point that's where that
that kind of global
holistic top down view
can work and
I'm
really a strong believer that technology
should be
sitting at that table having those discussions
because you do have cases where you say well
you want to be the Jonathan Ivy or whatever
where it's a pure design
solution and
that's in some
cases now where you truly have almost infinite
resources like if you're trying to do
a scrolling game on the PC
now you don't even have to talk to a technology
person you can just have
any intern can make that go run
as fast as it needs to there and it can be
completely design based
but if you're trying to do something that's hard
either that can't be done
for resources like VR on a mobile
chipset or that we don't even know how
to do yet like artificial general intelligence
it's probably going to be
a matter of coming at it from an angle
like I mean for AGI we have some of
like some of the Hutter principles
about how you can
sort of some of that there are theoretical
ways that you can say this is the optimal
learning algorithm that can solve everything
but it's completely impractical you know
you just can't do that so
clearly you have to make some concessions
for general intelligence
and nobody knows what the right ones are
yet so people are taking different
angles of attack I hope I've got something
clever to come up with in that space
it's been surprising to me
and I think perhaps it is a
principle of progress that
smoking mirrors somehow is the way
you build the future
you kind of
fake it till you make it
and you almost always make it and I think that's going to be
the way we achieve AGI
that's going to be the way we build
consciousness into our machines
is there's you know
philosophers debate about the touring test
is essentially about faking it
till you make it
you start by faking it
and I think that always leads
to making it
because if you look at history
arguments when as soon as people start talking about
qualia and consciousness
and Chinese rooms and things it's like
I just check out I just don't think there's any value
in those conversations it's just like
go ahead tell me it's not going to work
I'm going to do my best to try to make it work anyways
I don't know if you work with legged robots
there's a bunch of these
they make
they sure as heck make me feel like they're conscious
in a certain
way that's not here today
but is
you could see the kernel
it's like
the flame
the beginnings of a flame
we don't have line of sight but there's glimmerings
of light in the distance for all of these things
yeah I'm hearing murmuring in a distant
room
well let me ask you a human question here
you've in the game
design space you've done a lot of incredible work
throughout but in terms
of game design
you have changed the world and there's a few people
around you that did the same
so famously there's some animosity
there's much love
but there's some animosity between you
and John Romero
what is at the core of that animosity
and human tension
so there really hasn't been
for a long time and even at the beginning
it's like yes
I did push Romero out of the company
and
one of the things that I look back
if I could go back telling my younger self
some advice about things
the original
founding
corporate structure of id software
really led to a bunch of problems
we started off with us as
equal partners
and we had a buy sell agreement because we didn't
want outsiders to be telling us what to do
inside the company
and that did lead to a bunch of the
problems where I was sitting here going
it's like alright
I'm working harder than anyone
I'm doing these technologies
nobody's done before
but we're all equal partners
and then I see somebody that's
not working as hard
and it's
I can't say I was the most mature about that
I was 20 something years old
and it did
bother me when I'm like everybody
we need all pulled together and we've done it before
everybody we know we can do this
get together and we grind it all out
but not everybody wanted
to do that for for all time
you know and I was the youngest one of the
crowd there I had different
sets of kind of backgrounds
and motivations and left
at that point where
it was I'm alright
either everybody has to be contributing
like up to this level or they
need to get pushed out was not
I am that was not a
great situation and I look back
on it and know that
we pushed people out of the company that could
have contributed if there was
a different framework for them
and the modern kind of Silicon Valley
like let your stock vest over a time period
and maybe it's non voting stock
and all those different things we knew nothing about
any of that I mean we we didn't know
what we were doing in terms of corporate
structure or anything so if you think
the framework was different some of the
human tension could have been a little bit
almost certainly would have I
mean I look back at that and
and it's like even trying to summon up
in my mind it's like I know
I was really really angry
about I am you know like
Romero not working as hard as I wanted
him to work or not carrying
his load on the design for quake
and coming up with things there
but you know he was definitely doing things
he made some of the best levels there
he was working with our I some of
our external teams like Raven on the
licensing side of things
I am you know but there were differences
of opinion about it
but he landed you know right on his
feet he went he got 20 million dollars
from Eidos to go do I on storm
and he got to do things his way
and spun up three teams simultaneously
because that was always one of the
one of the challenging things in it it
where we were doing these single string
one project after another
and I think some of them you know
wanted to grow the company more and I
didn't because I knew people that were
saying that oh companies turn to shit
when you got 50 employees it's just
a different world there and I loved
our little dozen people
working on the projects
but you can look at and say well
business realities matter it's like
you're super successful here and we could
we could take a swing and a miss on
something but you do it a couple times
and you're out of luck there's
there's a reason companies try to have
multiple teams running at one time
I am and so
something I didn't really appreciate back then
so if you look past all that
you did create some amazing things together
what did you love about John Romero
what did you respect and appreciate about
what did you admire about him
what did you learn from him
when I met him he was the coolest programmer I had ever met
I you know he had done all of this
stuff he had he had made all of these
games he had worked at
you know one of the companies that I thought was the coolest
at origin systems and
he knew all this stuff he made things
happen fast and he could
it was also kind of a polymath about this where
he could do he made his own he drew his
own art he made his own levels as well
as you know we worked on sound design
systems on top of actually
being a really good programmer
and we had you know we went through
a little it was kind of fun where one of
the early things that we did where
there was kind of the young buck bit going in
where I was the new guy
and he was the kind of the
he was the top man programmer at
the soft disk area and eventually
we had sort of a challenge over the weekend
that we were going to like race to
implement this game to port one of our PC games
back down to the Apple too
and that was where we finally kind of became clear
it's like okay
Carmack stands a little bit apart on the
programming side of things and
but Romero then very gracefully
moved into well he'll work on the tools
he'll work on the systems
do some of the game design stuff as well as
contributing on starting
to lead the design aspects of a lot of things
so he was
enormously valuable
in the early stuff and so much of Doom
and even Quake have his stamp
on it in a lot of ways
but you know he wasn't
at the same level of focus that
I brought to the work that we were
doing there and he really did
we hit
such a degree of success that
it was all in the press about that
the Rockstar game programmers
I mean it's the Beatles problem
yeah I mean you know he ate it up
and he did personify it there was the whole
game developers with
Ferraris that we had
there and I thought that
you know that led to some
challenges there but
so much of the
you know the stuff that was great in the games
did come from him and I would certainly
not take that away from him
and even after we parted
ways and he took his swing with
Eidos in some ways he was
like he was ahead of the curve with mobile
gaming as well where
one of his companies after Eidos was working
on feature phone game development
and I wound up doing
some of that just before
the iPhone crossing over into the iPhone
phase there and that was something
that clearly did turn out to be a huge
thing although he was too
early for what he was working on
at that time you know we've had
pretty cordial relationships
where I was happy to talk with him anytime
I've run into him at a
conference I've actually had some other people
just say it's like oh you shouldn't
you know you shouldn't go over there and give him the time
of day or felt that
Masters of Doom was
you know like
played things up in a way that I shouldn't be
too happy with but I'm okay
with all of that. So you still got love
in your heart. Yeah I mean I just talked
with him like last year
I guess it was even this year about mentioning
that I'm going off doing this AI stuff
I'm going big into artificial intelligence
and he had a bunch of
ideas for how AI is going to
play into gaming and you know asked
if I was interested in collaborating and it's not
in line with what I'm
doing but I do you know
I wish almost everyone the best I mean
I know I may not have partnered on the best
of terms with you know with
some people but I was thrilled
to see Tom Hall writing
VR games now he wrote
working on a game called Demio which is
really an awesome VR game it's like
Dungeons and Dragons we all used to play Dungeons
and Dragons together that was one of the things that was what we did
on Sundays in the early
days I would dungeon master and they'd all play
and I you know so it really made
me smile seeing Tom involved with
an RPG game in virtual reality
you were
the CTO of Oculus
VR since 2013
and maybe less than a year involved
in a bit in
Oculus was acquired by Facebook
now meta in
2014 you've spoken
brilliantly about both the low level details
the experimental design and the big picture vision
of virtual reality
let me ask you about the metaverse
the big question here both
philosophically and technically
how hard is it to build the metaverse
what is the metaverse in your view
you started with discussing
and thinking about quake as a kind of metaverse
as you think about
it today what is the metaverse
the thing that
could create this compelling user value
this experience that will change the world
and how hard is it to build it
so the term comes from
Neil Stephenson's book snow crash
which many of us had read back in
the 90s it was one of those kind of
formative books and
there was this sense that
the
the possibilities and kind of the freedom
and unlimited capabilities
to build a virtual world
that does whatever you want
whatever you ask of it has been a powerful draw
for generations of developers
game developers specifically
and people that are thinking about more
general purpose applications
so we were talking about that
back in the doom and quake days about
how do you wind up with an interconnected
set of worlds that you kind of visit
from one to another and as
web pages were becoming a thing you start
thinking about how what is the
interactive kind of 3D based
equivalent of this and there were
a lot of really bad takes you had
like vermal then
virtual reality markup languages
and there's aspects like that
that came from people saying
well what kind of capabilities
should we develop to
to enable this and that
kind of capability first work has usually
not panned out very well
on the other hand we have
successful games that started
with things like doom and quake
and communities that formed around those
and whether it was server lists
in the early days or literal
portaling between different games
and then modern things
that are on completely different order of magnitude
like minecraft and fortnite that have
100 million plus users
you know
I still think that that's the right way
to go to build the metaverse is
you build something that's amazing that people
love and people wind up spending all their
time in because it's awesome
and you expand the capabilities of that
so even if it's a very basic experience
as long as people
minecraft is an amazing case study
in so many things
where what's been able to be done with
that is really enlightening
and there are other cases
where like right now roblox
is basically a game construction
kit aimed at kids and that was a capability
first play and it's achieving scale
that's on the same order
of those things so
it's not impossible but
my preferred bet would be
you make something amazing that people love
and you make it better and better
and that's where I could say
we could have gone back and followed a path
kind of like that in the early days
if you just kind of take the same game
whether it's when Activision demonstrated
that you could make Call of Duty every year
and not only is it not bad
people kind of love it and it's a
it's very profitable
it's something like that
take a great game
release a new version every year
that lets the capabilities grow and expand
to start saying it's like okay
it's a game about running around and shooting things
but now you can have
bring your media into it
you can add persistence of
social sense signs of life
or whatever you want to add to it
I still think that's
quite a good position to take
and I think that
doing a bottoms up capability
approach with Horizon Worlds
where it's a fairly general purpose
creators can build whatever
they want in their sort of thing
I am you know it's
it's hard to compare and compete with something
like Fortnite which also has
enormous amounts of creativity
even though it was not designed originally
as a general purpose sort of thing
so there's we have examples on both sides
me personally
I would have bet on
to do entertainment
valuable destination first
and expanding from there
so
can you imagine the thing that will be
kind of if we look back
a couple centuries from now
and you think about the experiences
that marked
the singularity the transition
in
where most of our world
moved into virtual reality
what do you think those experiences will look like
so I do think it's going to be
kind of like the way the web
slowly took over where you're
the frog in the pot of water
that's slowly heating up where
having lived through all of that
I remember when it was shocking to start
seeing the first website address
on a billboard when you're like hey
my computer world is infecting the real world
you know this is spreading out
in some way but
there's still when you look back and say
well what made the web take off
and it wasn't
a big bang sort of moment there
it was a bunch of little things
that turned out not to even be the things
that are relevant now that
brought them into it so
well I wonder from I mean like you said
you're not a historian so maybe
there's a historian
out there that could really identify
that moment
data driven way it could be like
MySpace or something like that
maybe the first major social network
that really reached into
non geek
world or something like that
I think that's kind of the fallacy
of historians though looking for
some of those kind of primary dominant
causes where so many of
these things are like we see
an exponential curve but it's not because
like one thing is going exponential
it's because we have hundreds
of little sigmoid curves overlapped on
top of each other and they just happen to keep
adding up so that you've got something kind
of going exponential at any given point
but no single one of them
was the critical thing there were
dozens and dozens of things I mean
seeing the transitions of stuff like
as obviously MySpace giving way
to other things but even like blogging giving
way to social media
and getting resurrected in
other guys and the memes that
happened there dancing baby gift
or whatever the all your base
not belong to us whatever those
early memes that led to the modern
memes and the humor on
the different the different evolution
of humor on the internet I'm sure
the historians will also write books about
from the different website
that support to create the infrastructure
for that humor like Reddit and all that kind of stuff
so people will go back
and they will name firsts and critical
moments but it's probably going to
be a poor approximation of what actually
happens and we've already
seen like in the VR space where
it didn't play out the
way we thought it would in terms of what was going to be
like when the modern
era VR basically started with my E3
demo of Doom 3 on the Rift prototype
so we're like first person
shooters in VR match made in heaven
right and that didn't
work out that way at all they have
you know they have the most comfort problems with it
and then the most popular
virtual reality app is Beat Saber
which nobody predicted back then
what does that make you
like from first
principles if you were to like
reverse engineer that why
are these like silly fun games
well it actually makes
very clear sense when you
analyze it from hindsight
and look at the engineering reasons where
it's not just that it was a magical
quirky idea it was something that
played almost perfectly to what
turned out to be the real strengths of VR
where the one thing that I really
underestimated importance in VR
was the importance of the controllers
I was still thinking we could do a lot more
with the game pad and just the
amazingness of taking any existing game
being able to move your head around and look around
that was really amazing
but the controllers
were super important but the problem is
so many things that you do with the controllers
just suck it feels like
it breaks the illusion like trying to pick up glasses
with the controllers where you're like oh use the grip
button when you're kind of close and it'll
snap into your hand all of those
things are unnatural
actions that you do them and it's still
part of the VR experience but
beat saber winds up
I playing only to the
strengths it completely hides all the weaknesses
of it because you are holding
something in your hand you keep a solid grip
on it the whole time it slices
through things without ever bumping into
things you never get into the point where
you know I'm knocking on this table but in
VR my hand just goes right through it
so you've got something that
slices through so it's never
your brain telling you oh I should have hit something
you've got a lightsaber here it's just
you expect it to slice through everything
audio and music
turned out to be a really powerful
aspect of virtual reality where you're
blocking the world off and constructing
the world around you and
I and being something that can run
efficiently on even this relatively
low powered hardware and
can have a valuable loop
in a small amount of time where
a lot of modern games you're supposed
to sit down and play it for an hour just to get
anywhere sometimes a new game takes an hour to
get through the tutorial level and that's
not good for VR for a couple reasons
you do still have the comfort issues if
you're moving around at all but you've
also got just you know discomfort
from the headset battery life span
on the mobile versions so having
things that do break down into
three and four minute windows of play
that turns out to be very valuable from
a gameplay standpoint
so it winds up being kind of a perfect
form of all of these things that are really
good it doesn't have any of the comfort
problems you're not navigating around
you're standing still all the stuff flies
at you it has placed audio
strengths it adds
the whole fitness in VR nobody
was thinking about that back in the
at the beginning and it turns out that
that is an excellent daily
fitness thing to be doing if you go play
an hour of beat saver
or supernatural or something that is
legit solid exercise
and it's more fun than doing it
just about any other way there
so that's kind of the arcade stage
of things if I were to
say with my experience with VR
the thing that I think
is powerful is the
maybe it's not here yet
but the degree to which
it is immersive in the way
that quake is immersive
it takes you to another world
for me because I'm a fan of role
playing games
the Elder Scrolls series
like
Skyrim or even Daggerfall
it just takes you to another world
and when you're not in that world
you miss not being there
and then you just you kind of want to
stay there forever because life is
shitty
and you just want to go to this place
is that I there was a
there was a time when I
we were kind of asked to come up with
like what's your view about VR
and I am
my pitch was that it should be better inside
the headset than outside it's the world
as you want it and
everybody thought that was dystopian
and like that's like oh you're just going to
forget about the world outside
and I don't get that
mindset where the idea that
if you can make the world better inside
the headset than outside
you've just improved the person's life
that has a headset that can wear it
and there are plenty of things
that we just can't do for everyone in the
real world everybody can't have Richard Branson's
private island but everyone can have
a private VR island and it can have
the things that they want on it and there's
a lot of these kind of rivalrous goods
in the real world that VR
can just be better at
we can do a lot of things like that
that can be very very rich
so yeah I want the I think it's going to be
a positive thing this world where people want
to go back into their headset
where it can be better than somebody
in a tiny apartment
can have a palatial estate in virtual reality
that can have all their friends from all over the world
come over and visit them
without everybody getting on a plane
and meeting in some place
and dealing with all the other logistics hassles
there is real value in the
you know the presence that you can get
for remote meetings it's
it's all the little things that we need to sort out
but those are things that we have
line of sight on people
that have been in like a good VR meeting
using work rooms where you can say
oh that was better than a zoom meeting
but of course it's more of a hassle
to get into it not everyone has the headset
interoperability is worse
you can't have you cap out at a certain number
there's all these things that need to be fixed
but that's one of those things you can look at
and say we know there's value there
we just need to really grind hard
file off all the rough edges
and make that possible
so you do think we have line of sight
because
there's a reason like
I do this podcast
in person for example
doing it remotely
it's not the same
and if somebody were to ask me
why it's not the same I wouldn't be able to write down
exactly why
but you're saying
that it's possible whatever the magic is
for in person interaction
that immersiveness
of the experience
we are almost there
yes so the idea of
like I'm
doing a VR interview with someone
I'm not saying it's here right now
but you can see glimmers
of what it should be and
we largely know what would need to be
fixed and improved to
like you say there's a difference between
a remote interview doing a podcast over zoom
or something and face to face
there's that sense of presence
that immediacy the super low latency
responsiveness being able to see
all the subtle things there
just occupying the same field of view
and all of those are things that we absolutely
can do in VR
and that simple case of
a small meeting with a couple people
that's the much easier case than everybody thinks
the ready player one multiverse with a thousand
people going across that you know a huge bridge
to amazing places
that's harder in a lot of other technical ways
not to say we can't also do
that but that's further away and has more challenges
but this small thing about
being able to have a meeting with
one or a few people
and have it feel real
feel like you're there
you have the same interactions and talking with them
you get subtle cues as we start
getting eye and face tracking and some of the other things
on high end headsets
a lot of that is going to come over
and it doesn't have to be
as good this is an important
thing that people miss where
there was a lot of people that
especially rich people that would
look at VR and say it's like
this just isn't that good
and I'd say it's like well you've already been
court side backstage
and you know on pit row and you've done all of
these experiences because you get to do them in
real life but most people don't
get to and even if the experience
is only half as good if it's something
that they never would have gotten to do before
it's still a very good thing
and as we can push that number up
over time it has a minimum
viable value level
when it does something
that is valuable enough to people as long as it's
better inside the headset on any metric
than it is outside and people choose to go
there we're on the right path
and we have a value gradient that
I'm just always hammering on we can just follow
this value gradient just keep making things
better rather than
going for that one
close your eyes swing for the fences
I kind of silver bullet
approach well I wonder if there's a value
gradient for in person meetings because if you
get that right
that would change the world
you don't need a ready player one
but
I wonder if there's that
value gradient you can follow
along because
if there is any follow it
then there'll be a certain
like face shift
a certain point where people
will shift from
from zoom to this
I wonder
what
what are the bottlenecks is it software
is it hardware like is it
is it all about latency
so I have big arguments
internally about strategic
things like that where I
like the next headset that's
coming out that we've made
various announcements about is going to be a higher end
headset more expensive more features
lots of people want to make those tradeoffs
I you know we'll see
what the market has to say about the
exact tradeoffs we've made here
but if you want to replace zoom
you need to have something that everybody has
and
I like cheaper because
also lighter
and cheaper wind up being
a virtuous cycle there where
expensive and more features
tends to also lead towards heavier and it just
kind of goes it's like let's add more features the features
are not
they have physical presence and weight
and draw from batteries and all of those
things so I've always favored
a lower end cheaper
faster approach that's why
I was always behind the mobile side of
VR rather than the higher end PC
headsets I think that's
proven out well but there's
I you always ideally we have
a whole range of things but if you've only got
one or two things it's important
that those two things cover the
you know the scope that you think is most
important when we're in a world when it's like
cell phones and there's 50 of them on the market
covering every conceivable
ecological niche you want that's going to be great
but we're not going to be there for a while
where the bottlenecks is it the hardware
the software yeah so right
now I am you can play
you can get workrooms
on quest and you can set up these
things and it's a pretty good experience it's
surprisingly good I haven't tried it it's
surprisingly good yeah the voice
latency is better on that
than a lot better than a zoom meeting
so you've got a more a better sense
of immediacy there the
expressions that you get from
the current hardware with just
kind of your controllers and your head
is pretty realistic feeling you've got a
pretty good sense of being there with someone
are these like
avatars of people yeah
you do you get to see their body
yeah and they're sitting around a table
yeah and it feel
it feels better than zoom better than
you yeah better than you'd expect for that it
is definitely
yeah I'd say it's it's quite a bit
better than zoom when everything's working right
but there's still all the rough edges
of the reason zoom became so successful
is because they just nailed the usability
of everything it's high quality
with a absolutely first rate
experience and we are not
there yet with any of the VR stuff
I'm trying to to push hard
to get I keep talking
about it's like it needs to just be one click
to make everything happen and we're getting there
in our our home environment not
the whole work rooms application but the main home
where you can now kind of go over and click
and invite and still winds up taking
five times longer than it should
but we're getting close to that
where you click there they click
on their button and then they're sitting there
in this good presence with you
but latencies need to get a lot better
user interface needs to get a lot better
I'm ubiquity of the headsets
needs to get better we need to have
a hundred million of them out there
just so that everybody knows somebody that uses
this all the time well I think it's a
virtuous cycle because I do think
the
interface
is the thing that makes or breaks
this kind of revolution
it's so interesting how like
you said one click but it's also like how you
achieve that one click
I don't know what is a
can I ask a dark
question maybe let's keep it outside of meta
but
this is about meta but also Google and
big company are they
able to do this kind of thing
it seems like let me put
on my cranky old man head
is they seem to
not do a good job of
creating
these user friendly interfaces
as they get bigger and bigger as a company
like Google has created
some of the greatest interfaces ever
early on and it's
I mean creating Gmail
just so many brilliant
interfaces
and she seems to be getting crappier
and crappier at that same with
meta same with
Microsoft
it's just it seems to get worse
and worse at that is this I don't know what is
it because you become more conservative
careful risk averse
is that why can you speak to that
and really eye opening to me working inside
a tech Titan where
I am you know I
had my small companies and then we're
acquired by a you know a midsize
game publisher and then
Oculus getting acquired by
meta and meta has grown by a factor
of many just in the
the eight years since the acquisition
so I did
not have experience with this
and it's it was interesting
because I remember like previously my benchmark
for kind of use
of resources was some of the government programs
I interacted with on the aerospace
side and I remember thinking
there was okay there's an Air Force
program and they spent 50 million dollars
and they didn't they didn't
launch anything they didn't even build anything
it was just kind of like they I you know
they made a bunch of papers and had some parts
in a warehouse and nothing came
of it's like 50 million dollars
I am and I have
I've had to radically recalibrate my
sense of like how much money can
be spent with without a product
of the resources where
on the very the plus
side VR has turned out
we've built pretty much
exactly what
you know we just passed the 10 year mark then
from my I like my first demo
of the Rift and if I
could have said what I wanted to have it would
have been a standalone inside
out tracked 4k resolution
headset that I
that could still plug into a PC for high end
rendering and that's exactly what we've got
on Quest 2 first of all let's
pause on that with me being cranky
and everything it's what
meta achieved with
Oculus and so on is incredible
I mean this is this
what when I thought about the future of
VR is what I imagine in terms of hardware
I would say and maybe in terms
of the experience as well but
it's still not there somehow
on the one hand we did kind of
achieve it and win and we've got we've sold
you know we're a success right now
but the amount of resources
that have gone into it it winds up getting
clotted up into counting where last
mark did announce that
they spent ten billion dollars a year
like on reality labs now reality
labs covers a lot it was
VR was not the large part
of it also had portal and spark and the
big AR research efforts
and it's been expanding out
to include AI and other things there
where I there's
a lot going on there but
ten billion dollars was just a number
that I had trouble processing
it's just I feel sick to my
stomach thinking about that much money
being spent but that's how
they demonstrate commitment to this
where it's not
more so than like yeah Google goes
and cancels all of these projects
different things I like that
while meta is really sticking with
the funding of VR and
AR is still further out with it so
there's something to be said for that
it's not just going to vanish
the works going in I just wish it could
be all those resources could be
applied more effectively
because I see all these cases I point
out these examples of how
a third party that we're kind of competing
with in various ways a number of these examples
and they do work
with a tenth of the people
that we do internally
and a lot of it comes from yes there's
the small company can just go do it
while in a big company you do have
to worry about I
is there some SDK internally that you
should be using because another team is making
it you have to have your cross functional
group meetups for different things
you do have more concerns about
you know about privacy or diversity
and equity and I'm safety
of different things parental issues
and things that a small start up company
can just kind of you know Cowboy
often do something interesting
and there's a lot more
that is a problem that you have to
pay attention to in the big companies but I'm not
willing to believe that we are within
even a factor of two
or four of what the efficiency could be
you know I am constantly
kind of crying out for it's like
we can do better than this
and you wonder what the mechanisms to
unlock that efficiency are
you know I don't
there is some sense in a large company
that
like an individual engineer might not believe
that they can change the world maybe
you delegate a little bit of the
responsibility to be the one
who changes the world in a big company
I think but the reality is
like the world
will get changed by a single
engineer anyway so if
whether inside Google or inside a start
up it doesn't matter it's just like Google
and Meta needs to
help those engineers believe they're the ones
that are going to decrease that latency
is it'll take one John Carmack
like the 20 year old
Carmack that's
inside meta right now to change everything
and I try to
point that out and push people it's like
try to go ahead and when you see
some because there is you get the silo
mentality where you're like okay I know
something's not right over there but that's
I'm staying in my lane here
and there's a couple people that I can
you know I can think about that are willing
to just like hop all over the place
and man I treasure them the people that are
just willing to they're fearless
you know they will go over and they will go
rebuild the kernel and change this distribution
go in and hack a firmware over here
to to get something done right
and that is relatively rare
you know there's thousands of developers
and you've got a small handful that are willing
to operate at that level
and you know and it's potentially risky
for them the the politics are
you know are real in a lot of that and I'm in the
you know very much the privileged position
of I am you know I'm
more or less untouchable there where
I've been dinged like twice for it's like
you said something insensitive in that post
and you should probably not say that
I am but for the most part
yes I you know I get away with
I every week I'm posting something
you know pretty loud and opinionated
in you know internally and
I think that's useful for the company
but I am
yeah it's not it's rare to have a
position like that and I can't necessarily
offer advice for how someone
can do that I well you could
offer advice to a company in general to
give a little bit of freedom
for the young wild
like the wildest ideas come from
the young minds
and so you need to give
the young minds freedom to think
big and wild and and crazy
and for that they have to be opinionated
they have to be
they have to think
crazy ideas and thoughts
and pursue them with a full
passion without being slowed down by bureaucracy
or managers and all that kind of stuff
obviously startups
really empower that but big companies
could too and that's that's a design
challenge for company for big companies
to see how can you enable
that how can you come there are
so many resources there and
they do you know amazing things do get
accomplished but there's so much
more that could come out of that and
you know I'm hope I'm always hopeful I'm
an optimist in almost everything you know I think
things can get better I think that they
can improve things that you go
through a path and you're learning
how does and doesn't work and I'm not
I'm not ready to be fatalistic about
the kind of the outcome of any of that
me neither I know too
many good people inside of those large
companies that are incredible
you have a friendship
with Elon Musk
often when I talk to him he'll bring up
how incredible of an engineer and just
a big picture thinker you are
his huge amount of respect
for you
I just I've never been
a fly in the wall between a discussion between
the two of you I just wonder is there something
you guys
debate argue about
discuss is there some interesting problems
that the two of you
think about you come from different
worlds maybe there's some intersection
and then in aerospace maybe
there's some intersection
in your new efforts
in artificial intelligence
in terms of thinking is there something
interesting you could say about sort of the
things that you need to base the two of you have
so I think in some ways
we do have a kind of similar background
where we're almost exactly the same age
and we had kind of similar
programming backgrounds on the personal
computers and you know even some of the
books that we would read and things that
would kind of turn us into the people that
we are today and
I think there is a degree of
sensibility similarities
where you know we kind of call
bullshit on the same things and kind of see
opportunities
in different technology and there's that
sense of you know I always talk about the
speed of light solutions for things and he's
thinking about kind of
minimum manufacturing and engineering and
operational standpoints for
things and
so I mean I first met Elon
right at the start of the aerospace era
where I wasn't familiar with
you know I was still in my game dev bubble
I really wasn't familiar with all the startups
that were going and being successful
and what went on with PayPal and all of his
different companies but you know I met
him as I was starting to do Armadillo
Aerospace and you know he
came down with kind of his right hand
propulsion guy and we
talked about rockets you know what can we
what can we do with this and it was kind
of specific things about like
how are our flight computers set up
what are different propellant options
you know what can happen with
different ways of putting
things together and then
in some ways he was certainly the
biggest player in the sort of
space community that was going on in the
early 2000s
he was the most
well funded although you know his funding
in the larger scheme of things compared to
a like a NASA or something
like that was really tiny
it was a lot more than I had at the time
I but
it was interesting I had a point years later
when I realized okay
my like my financial resources
at this point are basically what
Elon's was when he went all in
on SpaceX and Tesla
and there's
I think in many
corners he does not get
the respect that he should about being
a wealthy person that could
just retire and he went
all in where he was really
going to you know
he could have gone bust and there's
plenty of people you look at the you know
the sad athletes
or entertainers that had all the money
in the world and blew it he could have been
the business case example of that
but I
you know the things that he was doing space
exploration electrification of
transportation
solar city type things
these are big world level
things and I have a great deal
of admiration that he was willing
to throw himself so completely
into that because
in contrast with myself I was doing
armadillo aerospace with this tightly
bounded it was John's
crazy money at the time
that had a finite limit on it it was
never going to impact me or my family
if it completely
failed and I was still hedging
my bets working at in software
at the time when he had been
you know really all in
there and
I have a huge amount of respect for that
and people do not the other thing I get
irritated with is people would say it's like
Elon's just a business guy
he just got like he was gifted
the money and he's just kind of
investing in all of this when
he was really deeply involved
in a lot of the decisions
not all of them were perfect but
he cared very much
about engine material selection
propellant selection
and for years he'd be kind of telling
me it's like get off that hydrogen
peroxide stuff it's like
liquid oxygen is the only proper
oxidizer for this
and
the times that I've gone through the factories
with him we're talking
very detailed things about
like how this weld is made
how this sub assembly goes together
what are like start
up shut down behaviors of the different
things so he is
really in there
at a very detailed level and I think
that he is the best modern
example now of someone that
tries to that can effectively
micromanage some decisions on things
on both Tesla and
SpaceX to some degree where
he cares enough about it I worry a lot
that he stretched too thin that
you get boring company in Neuralink
and Twitter and all the other possible
things there where I know
I've got
limits on how much I can pay attention
to that I have to kind of box
off different amounts of time
and I look back at like at my aerospace
side of things it's like I did not
go all in on that I did not
commit myself at a level that it would
have taken to be successful there
and I
and it's kind of a weird thing just
like having a discussion with
the richest man in the world right now
he operates on
you know on a level that is still
very much in my
wheelhouse on a technical side of things
so doing that systems level type of
thinking we can go to the
level of details and go up high to the
big picture do you think
in the aerospace
arena
in the next 5, 10
years do you think we're going to put a human
on Mars like what do you think is the
interesting
no I do in fact I made
a bet with someone with a group of people
kind of this about whether
boots on Mars by 2030
and this was kind of a fun
fun story because I was
at an Intel sponsored event
and we had a bunch of just
world class brilliant people and we were
talking about computing stuff but the after dinner
conversation was like what are some other
things how they're going to go in the future
and one of the ones tossed up on the white board
was like boots on Mars by 2030
and most of the
people in the room thought yes
you know I thought that like SpaceX is kicking
ass we've got all this possible stuff
I seems likely that it's
going to go that way and
I said no I think
less than 50% chance that it's going to make
it there
and people you know were kind of like oh
why the pessimism or whatever and of course
I'm an optimist at almost everything
but for me to be the one kind
of outlier saying no I don't think so
then I started
saying some of the things I said well let's
be concrete about it let's bet
$10,000 that it's not going to happen
and this was
this was really a startling
thing to see that I again
room full of brilliant people but as
soon as like money came on the line
and they were like do I want to put
$10,000 and I was not the richest person
in the room there are people much better
off than there's a spectrum
but
you know as soon as they started think it's like oh I could
lose money by
keeping my position right
now and all these
engineers they engage their brain they started thinking
it's like okay launch windows
launch delays
like how many times would it take to get this
right what historical precedence do we have
and I
and then it mostly came down to it's like well
what about in transit by 2030
and then I if you know what about
I you know different things or would you
hand would you go for 2032
but one of the people did go ahead
and was optimistic enough to make a bet
with me so I have a $10,000
bet that by 2030
I think it's going to happen shortly thereafter
I think there will probably be infrastructure
on Mars by 2030
but I don't think that we'll have humans
on Mars on 23rd I think it's possible
but I think it's less than a 50% chance
so I felt safe making that bet
well I think
you had an interesting point
correct me if I'm wrong that's a dark one
that's um
that should perhaps
help people appreciate Elon Musk
which is
in this particular
effort
Elon is critical
to the success
SpaceX seems to be
critical to the
20th
humans on Mars by 2030
or thereabouts
so if something happens to Elon
then all of this
collapses
and this is in contrast to the other
$10,000 bet I made
kind of recently and that was
driving cars at like a level 5
running around cities
and people have kind of nitpicked that
that we probably don't mean exactly level 5
but the guy I'm having the bet with
is we're going to be
we know what we mean about this
yeah, coding horror
but I
yeah I mean it's just
he doesn't think that people are going to be riding around
in robo taxis in 2030
in major cities just
like you take an Uber now
you think it will
and the difference is everybody looks at this
it's like oh but Tesla's been wrong
they've been promising it for years
and it's not here yet
and the reason this is different
than the bet with Mars
is Mars really is
more than is comfortable a bet on
Elon Musk
that is his thing
and he is really going to move heaven and earth
to try to make that happen
and perhaps not even SpaceX
just Elon Musk
yeah because if Elon went away
and SpaceX went public
and got a board of directors
there are more profitable things they could be doing
than focusing on human
presence on Mars
so this really is a sort of personal thing there
and in
contrast with that self driving cars
have a dozen credible
companies working really hard
and while
yes it's going slower than most people
thought it would
betting against that is a bet against almost
the entire world in terms of
all of these companies that have all of these
incentives it's not just
you know one guy's passion project
I
and I do think that it is solvable
although there's I recognize it's not a hundred percent chance
because it's possible
the long tail of self driving problems winds up
being an AGI complete problem
I think there's plenty of value to
mine out of it with narrow AI
and I think that it's you know it's going to happen
probably more so than people expect
but it's that whole sigmoid
curve where you over you know
you overestimate the near term progress
you underestimate the long term progress
and I think self driving is going to be like
that and I think 2030 still
a pretty good bet
yeah unfortunately
self driving
is a problem that
is safety critical
meaning that
if you don't do it well
people get hurt
but the other side of that is people are terrible drivers
so it is not going to be
that's probably going to be the argument that gets it through
is like we can save
10,000 lives a year
by taking imperfect self driving
cars and letting them take over a lot
of driving responsibilities
it's like was it 30,000 people a year
die in auto accidents right now in America
and a lot of those are
preventable and the problem is you'll have
people that every time a Tesla
crashes into something you've got a bunch of people
that literally have vested interest
shorting Tesla to come out and make it the
worst thing in the world and people
will be fighting against that but
optimist in me again I think that
we will have systems that are statistically
safer than human drivers
and we will be saving
thousands and thousands of lives
every year when we can hand over
more of those responsibilities to it
I do still think as a person
who studied this problem very deeply
from a human side as well
it's still an open problem
how good slash bad
humans are driving
it's a kind of funny
thing we say about each other oh humans
suck at driving
everybody except you
of course like we think we're good at driving
but I
after really studying it
I think you start to notice
you know because I watched
hundreds of hours of humans
driving the projects of this kind of
thing you've noticed that
even with the distraction
even with everything else humans are
able to do
some incredible things
with the attention even when you're
just looking at the smartphone just to get
cues from the environment to make
less seconds decisions
to use instinctual
type of decisions that actually save
your ass time and time and time again
and
are able to do that
with so much uncertainty around you
in such tricky dynamic environments
I don't know
I don't know exactly
how hard is it
to beat that kind of
skill of common sense reasoning
so this is one of those interesting
things that there have been a lot of studies about
how experts in their field
usually underestimate the
progress that's going to happen
because an expert thinks about all the
problems they deal with and they're like
damn I'm going to have a hard time solving
all of this and they filter out the fact
that they are one expert in a field of
thousands and you know
you think about yeah I can't do all of that
and you sometimes forget about the scope of
the ecosystem that you're embedded in
and if you think back eight years
very specifically the state of AI
and machine learning where
we had just gotten resnets probably
at that point and you look at all
of the amazing magical things
that have happened in eight years
and they do kind of seem to be happening
a little faster in recent years also
and you project that eight more years
into the future where again
I think there's a 50% chance we're going to
have signs of life of AGI
which we can put through driver's
ed if we need to to actually build
self driving cars and I think that
the narrow systems are going to
have real value demonstrated well before
then
that there's a lot of life in AGI
you've mentioned that
okay first of all
you're one of the most
brilliant people on this earth you could be
solving a number of different
problems as you've mentioned
your mind was attracted to nuclear energy
obviously virtual reality
with the metaverse is something you could have
a tremendous impact on so I do want to say
a quick thing about nuclear energy where
I you know this is something that
I read this so
precisely feels like aerospace
before SpaceX where
from everything that I know about all of these
I am the physics of this
stuff hasn't changed and
the reasons why things are expensive
now are not fundamental
I somebody
should be going into I
really hard Elon musk
style at
vision economical vision not
fusion where the
fusion is the kind of the
darling of people that want to go and do
nuclear because it doesn't have
the taint that fission has in a lot of people's
minds but
it's an almost absurdly complex thing
where nuclear fusion
as you look at the Tokamax
or any of the things that people are building and it's
doing all of this infrastructure
just at the end of the day to make something
hot to that you can then
turn into energy through a conventional
power plant and all of that
work which we think we've got line of sight
on but even if it comes out
then you have to do all of that
immensely complex expensive stuff
just to make something hot where
nuclear fission is basically you put these two
rocks together and they get hot all
by themselves that is just
that much simpler it's just
orders of magnitude simpler
and the actual rocks the refined uranium
is not very expensive it's
a couple percent of the cost
of electricity that's why I made that point
where you could have something which was
five times less efficient
than current systems
and if the rest of the plant was a whole much cheaper
you could still be super super
valuable so how much of
the pie do you think
could be solved
by nuclear energy by fission
so how much could it
become the primary source of energy on earth
it could be most of it
like the reserves of uranium as it stands now
could not power the whole earth but
I am you know you get into breeder reactors
and thorium and things like that
that you do for conventional fission
there is enough for everything
now I mean solar
photovoltaic has been amazing
you know it's I
one of my current projects is working on an
off grid system and it's been fun just
kind of again putting my hands on all the
stripping the wires and wiring things together
and doing all of that and just having followed
that a little bit from the outside
over the last couple decades
there's been semiconductor like magical
progress in what's going on there
so I'm all for all of that
but it doesn't solve everything and nuclear
really still does seem like
the smart money bet for what you should be
getting for baseband on a lot of things
and solar may be cheaper for
you know peaking over air conditioning loads
during the the summer and things that you
can push around in different ways
but it's one of those things that's
it's just strange how
we've had the technology sitting there
but these non technical reasons on the
social optics of it has been
this major forcing function
for something that
you know really should be at the cornerstone
of all of the world's concerns
with energy it's interesting
how the non technical factors
have really dominated something that is
so fundamental to
kind of the existence of the human race as we
know it today
and much of the troubles of the world including
wars in different parts
of the world like Ukraine is energy
based and
yeah it's just sitting right there to be solved
that said
I mean to me personally I think
it's clear that if AGI would
be achieved that would change the course
of human history so AGI
wise I was
I was making this decision about what do I want
to focus on after
VR and I'm still working on VR
regularly I spend a day
a week kind of consulting with
meta and I you know
boss styles me the consulting
CTO is kind of like the Sherlock Holmes
that comes in and consults on
some of the specific tough issues
and I'm still pretty passionate about all
of that but I have been
figuring out how to compartmentalize
and force that into a smaller
box to work on some other things
and I did come down to this decision between
working on
economical nuclear fission or
artificial general intelligence
and the fission side of things
I've got a bunch of interesting things
going that way but
it would take that would be a fairly big
project thing to do I don't think
it needs to be as big as people expect
I do think something original space
excised I
you build it power your building off of it
and then the government I think will come
around to what you need to
is everybody loves an existence proof
I think it's possible somebody should be
doing this but it's going to involve
some politics it's going to involve
decent sized teams and a bunch of this
cross functional stuff that I don't love
while the artificial
general intelligence side of things
I'm
it seems to me like this is
the highest leverage
moment for potentially
a single individual potentially
in the history of the world where
the things that we know about
the brain about what we can do
with artificial intelligence
nobody can say absolutely
on any of these things but
I am not a madman
for saying that it is likely
that the code for artificial general
intelligence is going to be
tens of thousands of lines
of code not millions of lines
of code this is code that conceivably
one individual could
write unlike writing a new web browser
operating system
and based on the progress
that AI has machine
learning has made in the recent decade
it's likely that the
important things that we don't know
are relatively simple there's
probably a handful of things
and my bet is that
I think there's less than
six key insights that need
to be made each one of them can probably
be written on the back of an envelope
we don't know what they are but when
they're put together in concert with
GPUs at scale and the data
that we all have access to
that we can make something that behaves
like a human being
or like a living creature
and that can then be educated
in whatever ways that we need to get to the point
where we can have
universal remote workers where
anything that somebody does
mediated by a computer and doesn't require
physical interaction
that an AGI will be able to do
we can already simulate the
equivalent of the zoom meetings
with avatars and
synthetic deepfakes and whatnot
we can definitely do that
we have superhuman capabilities
on any narrow thing that we can
that we can formalize and make a loss
function for but there's things we don't
know how to do now but I don't
think they are unapproachably
hard now that's incredibly hubristic
to say that it's like
but I think that what I said a couple
years ago is a 50% chance
that somewhere there will be signs of
life of AGI in
2030 and I've probably increased
that slightly I may be at
55, 60% now because I do
think there's a little sense of
acceleration there.
So I wonder what the and by the way you also
written that I bet
with hindsight we will find that clear
antecedents of all the critical
remaining steps for AGI
are already buried somewhere
in the vast literature of today so the ideas
are already there.
I think that's likely the case one of the
things that appeals to so many people
including me about the promise of AGI
is we know that
we're only drinking from a straw from
the fire hose of all the information
out there I mean you look at
just in a very narrowly
bounded field like machine learning like
you can't read all the papers that come out
all the time you can't go back and read
all the clever things that people did
in the 90s or earlier that people have
forgotten about because they didn't pan out
all the time when they were trying to do them
with 12 neurons
so that this idea that
yeah I think there are gems
buried in some of the older literature
that was not the path taken by everything
and you can see a kind of herd
mentality on the things that happen right
now it's almost funny to see
like oh Google does something and open AI
does something meta does something and
you know they're the same people that all
talk to each other and they all one up in
each other and they're all capable of
each other's work given a month
or two after somebody has an announcement
of that but there's
a whole world of possible
approaches to machine learning
and I think that
we probably will in hindsight go back and see
it's like yeah that was kind of clearly
predicted by this early paper
here you know and this turns out
that if you do this and this and take this result
from animal training
and this thing from neuroscience over here
and put it together and set
up this curriculum for them to learn in
that that's kind of what it took
you don't have too many people
now that are still saying it's not
possible or it's going to take hundreds of years
and 10 years ago you would get
you would collect get a collection of experts
and you would have a decent chunk on the margin
that either say not possible
or a couple hundred years
might be centuries and the median
estimate would be like
50 70 years and it's been
coming down and I know with me saying
eight years for something that still puts me
on the optimistic side but it's not
crazy out in the fringes
and just being able to look at that
at a meta level about the trend
of the
predictions going down there
the idea that something could
be happening relatively soon
now
I do not believe in fast takeoffs
that's one of the safety issues that people say
it's like oh it's going to go boom and the AI
is going to take over the world
and that's one of the reasons I don't think
that's a credible position
and I think that
we will go from a point where we start
seeing things that
that credibly look like
look like animals behaviors and
I have a human voice box wired into them
it's like I tried to get Elon to say
it's like you're you're pig in neurolink
give it a human voice box and let it start
learning human words
I think that you know I think animal intelligence
is closer to human intelligence than a lot
and I think that culture and modalities
of IO
make the gulf seem a lot bigger than it
actually is there's just that smooth
spectrum of how the brain developed
and cortexes and
scaling of different things going on there
cultural modalities of IO
yes languages
the
sort of loss in translation conceals a lot
of intelligence
so when you think about
signs of life for AGI
thinking about
human interpretable signs
so the example I give if we get to the point
where you've got a learning disabled toddler
some kind of real special needs
child that can still
interact with their favorite TV show
and video game and can be
trained and learn in some
appreciably human like way
at that point you can deploy an army
of engineers
cognitive scientist education
developmental education people
and you've got so many advantages
there unlike real education where you
can do rollbacks and A.B. testing
and you can find a golden path through a curriculum
of different things if you get to that point
learning disabled toddler
I think that it's
it's going to be a done deal
but you think we'll know when we see it
so
there's been a lot of really interesting
general learning progress from
deep mind
opening eye a little bit too
I tend to believe
that Tesla autopilot deserves
a lot more credit than it's getting
for making progress
on the general
on the doing the multitask learning
thing and increasing the number of tasks
and automating that
process of
sort of
learning from the edge
discovering the edge cases and learning from the edge cases
that is it's really
approaching from a different angle the general
learning problem
but the more clear approach
comes from deep mind where you have these
kind of game situations
build systems
there but I don't know
people seem to be quite
there will always be people that just won't
believe it and I fundamentally
don't care I mean I don't care
if they don't believe it I
when it starts doing people's jobs
and I mean I don't care about the
philosophical zombie argument at all
absolutely absolutely but will you
do you think you will notice that something
special has happened here
or
because to me I've been
noticing a lot of special things
I think a lot of credit should go
to deep mind for alpha
zero
that was truly special
self play mechanisms achieve
sort of solve problems that
used to be thought unsolvable
like the game of go
also I mean protein folding
starting to get into that space
where learning is doing
at first it wasn't
end to end learning
now it's end to end learning
of a very difficult previously thought
unsolvable problem of protein folding
and so
where do you think
would be a really magical
moment for you
there have been incredible things happening
in recent years like you say all of the
things from deep mind and open AI
that have been huge show piece
things but when you really get down to it
you read the papers and you look at the way
the models are going
it's still like a feed forward
you push something in something comes out
on the end I mean maybe there's
diffusion models or Monte Carlo
tree rollouts and different things going on
but it's not a being
it's not close to a being
that's going through
a lifelong learning process
do you want something that kind
of gives signs of a being
like what's the difference between
a neural network
a feed forward neural network
and a being
so where's the
fundamentally the brain is a recurrent neural network
generating an action policy
I mean it's implemented on a biological
substrate and it's interesting thinking about
things like that where we know fundamentally
the brain is not
a convolutional neural network or a transformer
those are specialized things that
are very valuable for what we're doing
but it's not the way the brain's doing now
I do think consciousness and AI
in general is a substrate
independent mechanism where
it doesn't have to be implemented the way the brain is
but if you've only got one existence
proof there's certainly some
value in caring about what it says and does
and so the idea that
anything that can be done with a narrow
AI that you can quantify up a
loss function for a reward mechanism
you're almost certainly going to be able
to produce something that's more
resource effective to train and deploy
and use in an inference mode
you know train a whole lot using an inference
but a living being
is going to be something that's a continuous
lifelong learned task
agnostic thing
and while a lot of learning
is really important too and the
long term memory
so memory is a big weird part
of that puzzle. We've got
again I have all the respect in the world
for the amazing things that are being done
now but sometimes they can be taken
a little bit out of context with things
like there's some smoke and
mirrors going on like the GATO
the recent work the multi task learning stuff
you know it's amazing that it's the one
it's one model that plays all
the Atari games I am as well
as doing all these other things
but I of course it didn't learn
to do all of those it was instructed
in doing that by other reinforcement
learners going through and doing that
and even in the case of all the games
it's still going with a specific
hand coded reward function
in each of those Atari games
where it's not that you know how does it
it just wants to spend its summer afternoon
playing Atari because that's the most interesting
thing for it so it's again not
a general it's not learning the way
humans learn and there's
I believe a lot of things that are
challenging to make a loss function
for that you can train through
these existing conventional things
we're going to chip away at all the things
that people do I am
that we can turn into narrow
AI problems and
billions of probably trillions of
dollars of value are going to be created
by that but there's still going to be
a set of things and we've got questionable
cases like the self driving car
where it's possible it's
not my bet but it's plausible
that the long tail could be problematic
enough that that really does require
a full on artificial general intelligence
I am the counter argument
is that data solves almost everything
is an interpolation problem if you have enough
data and Tesla may be able to get
enough data from all
their deployed stuff to be able to work like
that but maybe not and
there are all the other problems about like say
you want to have a strategy meeting
and you want to go ahead and bring in all
the remote workers and your consultants
and you want a world where some of those
could be AIs that are
you know that are talking and interacting
with you in an area
that is too murky to have a crisp loss
function but they still have
things that on some level they're
rewarded on some internal level
for building a valuable to humans
kind of life
and ability to interact with things
see I still think
that self driving car
solving that problem will take us very far
towards AGI you might not need AGI
but I am really
inspired by what
autopilot is doing
Waymo, so some of the other
companies I think Waymo leads the way
there is also really
interesting but they don't have quite as ambitious
of an effort in terms of
learning based
sort of data hungry
approach to driving which I think
is very close to the kind of thing that would
take us far
towards AGI. Yeah and it's a funny thing
because as far as I can tell
Elon is completely serious about all of his
concerns about AGI
being an existential threat and
I tried to draw him out to talk about AI
and he just didn't want to
and I think that
I get that little fatalistic sense from him
and it's weird because his company
could very well be the leading company
leading towards a lot of that where
Tesla being a super pragmatic company
that's doing things because
they really want to solve this actual problem
it's a different vibe than the research
oriented companies where
it's a great time to be an AI researcher
you've got your pick of trillion dollar companies
that will pay you to kind of work on the problems
you're interested in but that's not
necessarily driving hard towards
the core problem of
AGI as something that's going to produce
a lot of value by doing things that
you know that people currently do
or would like to do.
I have a million questions to you
about your ideas about
AGI but do you think
it needs to be embodied
do you think it needs to have a body
to start to
notice the signs of life
to develop the kind of system that's
able to reason
perceive the world in the way that an AGI
should and act in the world
so should we be thinking about robots
or can this be achieved in a
purely digital system?
What's your opinion on that and that's
that no it does not need
to be embodied in the physical world
where you could say most of my
career is about making simulated
virtual worlds in games
or virtual reality and so
on a fundamental level I believe that
you can make a simulated environment that provides
much of the value of what the real
environment does and restricting
yourself to operating
at real time in the physical world with
physical objects I think is an enormous
handicap I mean that's one
of the real lessons driven home by all my
aerospace work is that
you know
reality is a bitch in so many ways there
we're dealing with all the mechanical components
like everything fails, Murphy's law
even if you've done it right before on your fifth one
it might come out differently
so yeah I think that
anybody that
is all in on the embodied aspect of it
they are tying a huge weight
to their ankles and I think
I would almost
count them out anybody that's making that a cornerstone
of their belief about it I would almost write
them off as being worried about them
getting to AGI first
I was very surprised that Elon's big on
the humanoid robots
I mean like the NASA Robonaut stuff was always
almost a gag line
like what are you doing people?
Well that's very interesting because he has a very pragmatic
view of that that's just
a way to solve a particular problem
in a factory. Now I do think that
once you have an AGI
robotic bodies, humanoid bodies are going to be
enormously valuable I just don't think
they're helpful getting to AGI
Well he has a very sort of practical view
which I disagree with and I argue with him
but it's a practical view that
there's you know you could
transfer the problem of
driving to the problem of
robotic manipulation
because so much of it is perception
it's perception
and it's just a different context
and so you can apply all the same
kind of data engine
learning processes to a
different environment and so why not
apply it to the humanoid robot environment
but
I think
I do think that there's a certain
magic to the body
robot.
That may be the thing that finally convinces people
but again I don't really care
that much about convincing people
but the world that I'm looking towards
is you know you
you go to the website and say
I want five Frank 1As to
work on my team today and they all spin up
and they start showing up in your Zoom meetings
to push back but also
to agree with you but first to push back
I do think you need to convince people
for them to welcome that thing
into their life.
I think there's enough businesses that operate
on an objective kind of profit
loss sort of basis that
I mean if you look at how many things
again talking about the world as
an evolutionary space there
when you do have free markets and you have
entrepreneurs
you're going to have people that are going to be willing to go out and try
whatever crazy things
and when it proves to be beneficial
you know there's fast followers in all sorts of
places.
Yeah and you're saying that
Quake and VR
is a kind of embodiment but just in
a digital world and if you're able to
demonstrate
if you're able to do something productive in that kind
of digital reality
then AGI doesn't
need to have a body. Yeah it's like one of the really
practical technical questions that I kind
of keep arguing with myself over
if you're doing a training
and learning and you've got like you can
watch Sesame Street you can play master system
games or something is it enough
to have just a video feed that
is that video coming in
or should it literally be on
a virtual TV set in a virtual room
even if it's a simple room
just to have that sense of
you're looking at a 2D projection on a screen
versus having the screen beamed directly
into your retinas and
I think it's possible
to maybe get past some of these signs
of life of things with the
just kind of projected directly into the receptor
fields but eventually
for more
kind of human emotional connection
for things probably having
some VR room with a lot of screens
in it for the AI to be learning in
is likely helpful
it may be a world of different AIs
interacting with each other. That self play I do think
is one of the critical things where
socialization wise one of the other limitations
I set for myself thinking about
these is I need
something that is at least
potentially real time because
I want it's nice you can always slow down
time you can run on a subscale
system and test an algorithm
at some lower level and if you've got
extra horsepower running it faster than real time
is a great thing but
I want to be able to
have the AIs
either socially interact with each other
or critically with actual
people you're sort of child development psychiatrist
that comes in and
interacts and does the good boy, bad boy
sort of thing
as they're going through and exploring different things
and it's nice to
I come back to the value of
constraints in a lot of ways and if I say
well one of my constraints is real time
operation I mean it might still be
a huge data center full of
computers but it should be
able to interact on a zoom meeting
with people and that's how you also do
start convincing people even if it's not
a robot body moving around which eventually
gets to irrefutable levels
but if you can go ahead and
not just type back and forth to a GPT
bot on something but
you're literally talking to them
embodied over zoom form
and working through problems
with them or exploring situations
having conversations
that are fully stateful and learned
I think that
that's a valuable thing so I do keep
all of my eyes on things that
can be implemented within sort of that
30 frames per second
kind of work and I think that's feasible
Do you think the most compelling experience
is that it first will be
for pleasure
or for business as they ask in airports
so
meaning is it
if it's interacting with
AI
agents will it be
sort of like friends
entertainment
almost like a therapist or whatever
that kind of interaction
or is it in the business setting something
like you said brainstorming different ideas
sort of
this is all a different formulation of
a kind of a touring test or the spirit
of the original touring test where do you think
the biggest benefit will first come
So it's going to start off hugely expensive
I mean you're going to
we're still all guessing about
what compute is going to be necessary
I fall on the side of I don't think
you run the numbers and you're like 86 billion neurons
100 trillion synapses
I don't think those all need to be weights
I don't think we need models that are quite that big
that often
we've got reasonable estimates
of what some parts of the brain do
we don't have the neocortex formula
but we kind of get some of the other sensory
processing and it doesn't feel like
we need to we can simulate that in computers
for less weights but still
it's probably going to be
thousands of GPUs
to be running
a human level AGI
depending on how it's implemented that might give you
sort of a clan of 128
run in batch people
depending on whether they're sparsity in the way
the weights and things are set up
if it is a reasonably dense thing
then just the memory bandwidth tradeoffs
means you get 128 of them at the same time
and either it's
all feeding together learning in parallel
or kind of all running together
I kind of talking to a bunch of people
but still if you've got thousands of GPUs
necessary to run these
things it's going to be kind of
expensive where it might start
off a thousand dollars
an hour for your even post
development or something for that
which would be something that you would only use
for a business
something where you think they're going to help you make
a strategic decision or point out something
super important but I also
am completely confident
that we will have another factor
of a thousand in cost performance
increase in AGI
type calculations
not in general computing necessarily
but there's so much more that we can do
with packaging, making those right tradeoffs
all those same types of things that
in the next couple of decades
thousand X easy and then you're down to a dollar an hour
and
then you're kind of like well
I should have an entourage of AIs
that are following me around
helping me out on anything that I want them to do
that's one interesting trajectory
but I'll push back
because I have a
so in that case
with a thousand dollars
it should actually provide some value
I think it's easier
for cheaper
to provide
value via a dumb
AI
that will take us towards AGI
to just have a friend
I think there's an ocean of loneliness
in the world
and I think an effective friend
that doesn't have to be perfect
that doesn't have to be intelligent
empathic
having emotional intelligence
having ability to remember things
having ability to listen
most of us don't listen to each other
one of the things that love
and when you care about somebody
when you love somebody is when you listen
and that is something we treasure about each other
and
if an AI can do that kind of thing
I think that
provides a huge amount of value
and very importantly
provides value in its ability
to listen
and understand
versus provide really good advice
I think providing really good advice
is another next level
step that would
I think it's just
easier to do companionship
I wouldn't disagree
I think that there's very few things
that I would argue can't be reduced
to some kind of a narrow
AI
a trillion dollars of value easily
and all the things that can be done there
and a lot of it can be done with smoke and mirrors
without having to go the whole thing
there's going to be the equivalent of the Doom
the Doom version
for the AGI that's
not really AGI, it's all smoke and mirrors
but it happens to do another valuable things
that it's enormously useful
and valuable to people
but at some point you do want to get to the point
where you have the fully general thing
and you stop making bespoke specialized systems
for each thing and you wind up
start using the higher level language
instead of writing everything in assembly language
what about consciousness
the C word
what do you think that's
fundamental
to solving AGI
or is it a quirk of human
cognition
so I think most of the arguments
about consciousness don't have a whole
lot of merit
I think that consciousness is kind of
the way the brain feels when it's operating
and
this idea that
I do generally subscribe
to sort of the pandemonium theories of consciousness
where there's all these things bubbling around
and I think of them as
kind of slightly randomized
sparse distributed memory bit strings of things
that are kind of happening
recalling different associative memories
and eventually you get some level of consensus
and it bubbles up to the point of being a conscious
thought there
there's a little bit of stochasticity
that are sitting on in this
as it cycles between different things
and recalls different memory
that's largely our imagination and creativity
so I don't think
there's anything deeply magical
about it certainly not symbolic
I think it is generally the flow of these
associations
drawn up with stochastic
noise overlaid on top of them
I think so much of that is
like it depends on what you happen to have
a view as some other thought was occurring
to you that overlay and blend
into the next key that queries your memory
for things and that kind of determines
how your chain of consciousness
goes so that's kind
of the quality of the subjective
experience of it is not
is not essential for intelligence
I don't think so I don't think there's anything really important
there what about some other
human qualities like fear of mortality
and stuff like that like
the fact that this ride ends
is that
important like you
talk so much about this conversation
about the value of deadlines and constraints
do you think that's important
for intelligence? That's actually a super
interesting angle that I don't usually
take on that about has death being
a deadline that forces you to make better decisions
because I have heard people
talk about how if you have immortality
people are going to stop trying
and working on things because they've got all the time
in the world
but I would say that
I don't expect it to be
a super critical thing
that a sense of mortality
and death impending death is
necessary there because those are things that
they do wind up providing reward signals
to us and we will be in control of the
reward signals and there will have
to be something fundamental that causes
that engenders curiosity and goal
setting and all of that
something is going to play in there
at the reward level
whether it's positive or negative
or both. I don't
have any strong opinions
on exactly what it's going to be
but that's that type of thing
where I doubt
that might be one of those half dozen key
things that has to be sorted out on exactly
what the master reward
that's the meta reward overall of the
local task specific rewards
have to be. That could be that big
negative reward of death
maybe not death but ability
to walk away from an interaction
so it bothers me
when people treat AI systems like
servants so
it doesn't bother me but I mean
it really is drawing
the line
between what an AI system could be
it's limiting the possibility what an AI system
could be is treating them as justice tools
now that's of course
from a narrow AI perspective
there's so many
problems that narrow AI
I could solve just like you said
as
in its form of a tool
but it could also be
a being
which is much more than a tool and
to become a being
you have to respect that thing for being
a being and for that
it has to be able to have
to make its own
decisions to walk away to say
I had enough of you I would like to break up
with you now
not treated me well and I would like to
move on so
I think that actually
that choice
to end things
so I have
a couple of things on that so on the one hand
it is kind of disturbing when you see
people being like people that are mean to
robots and you know mean to Alexa
whatever and that seems
to speak badly about humanity
but there's also the exact opposite
side of that where you have so many people that
imbue humanity in
inanimate objects or things that are toys
or that are relatively limited
so I think there may even be
more danger about people putting more
emotional investment into a lot of these
proto AIs in different ways
and then the
AI would manipulate that
but as far as like the AI
ethnic sides of things
I really stay away
from any of those discussions or even
really thinking about it it's
similar with the safety things where I think
it's just premature and there's a certain
class of people that enjoy
thinking about impractical things
things are not in the world
you know of pragmatic effect around
you and I think that
again because I don't think
there's going to be a fast takeoff I think we actually
will have time to have these debates
when we know the shape of what we're debating
and some people do take a
principled approach that they think it's going to go too
fast that you really do need to get ahead of it
that you need to be thinking about this because
we have slow processes of coming
to any kind of consensus or even coming
up with ideas about this
and maybe that's
maybe that's true
I wouldn't put any of my money or funding
into something like that because
I don't think it's a problem yet
and I think that we will have these signs
of life when we've got our learning
disabled toddler we should really start
talking about some of the safety and ethics
issues but probably not before
then can you elaborate
briefly about why you don't think there'll
be a fast takeoff is there
some deep intuition you have about it
does it because it's grounded in the physical
world or why yeah so
it is my belief that we're going to start
off with something that requires thousands
of GPUs and
I don't know if you've tried to go get
a thousand GPU instance on a cloud
anytime recently but these are not
things that you can just go spin up
hundreds of I
there are real challenges to
I mean these things are going to take data centers
and data centers take years to build
you know and the last few years
we've seen a few of them kind of coming up
going in different places they're big engineering
efforts you can hear people
bemoan about the fact that I
know that the network was wired
all wrong and it took them a month to go
unwire it and rewire it the right way
these aren't things that you can just magic
into existence and
the ideas of I am like the old
tropes about it's going to escape on the internet
and take over other systems
there's the fast takeoff ones are clearly
nonsense because you just can't open TCP
connections above a certain rate no matter
how smart you are even if you have perfect
hacking ability that take over the world
in an instant sort of thing just
isn't plausible at all and
even if you had access to all of the resources
these are going to be
specialized systems where
you're going to wind up with something that is architected
around exactly
this chip with this interconnect
and it's not just going to be able to be
plopped somewhere else now interestingly
it is going to be something that the entire
the entire
code for all of it will easily fit on a thumb drive
that's total spy movie
thriller sorts of things where
you could have hey we crack the secret AGI
and it fits on this thumb drive and anyone
could steal it now they're still going to have to build
the right data center to deploy it
and have the right kind of life experience
curriculum to take it up to the point
where it's valuable but the real core of it
the magic that's going to happen there
is going to be very small
you know it's again tens of thousands of lines
of code not millions of lines of code
it is possible to imagine a world
as you mentioned this spy thriller
view if it's
if it's just a few lines of code
we can imagine a world where the surface
of computation is growing maybe growing
exponentially meaning
there's you know the
refrigerators start getting a GPU
and
just every first all
the smartphones the billions of smartphones
but maybe if
there become
highways through
which code can spread across the
entirety of the computation surface
then you don't
any longer have to book
AWS
GPU real fundamental
issues there when you start getting down to
taking an actual problem
and putting it on an abstract machine like that
that has not worked out well
in practice and the idea
that there was always
like it's always been easy to come up with ways
to get compute faster
say more flops or more
giga ops or whatever there that's usually
the easy part but you then
have interconnect and then memory
for what goes into it and
when you talk about saying well cell phones
well you're limited to like a 5G connection
or something on that and
if you say how if you take
your your calculation you factor
it across a million
cell phones instead of
a thousand GPUs in a warehouse
you might be able to have some kind of a substrate
like that but it could be operating
then at
one thousandth the speed and so yes
you could get you could have an AGI working there
but it wouldn't be a real time AGI it would be
something that is operating at
really a snail's pace
much much slower than
kind of human level thought for things
I'm not worried about that problem
you're transferring the problem into the
interconnect the communication
the shared memory
the collective intelligence aspect of it
which is extremely difficult as well
I mean it's back to the very earliest days of
supercomputers you still have the
the balance between bandwidth
storage and computation
and sometimes they're easier to get one or the other
but it's been remarkably constant
across all those years that
you still need all three
what do your efforts
now you mentioned
to me that you're really
committing to AGI at this
stage what what do you see your life
in the next few months years look like
what what do you hope to achieve
achieve here so
I literally just this
week signed a term sheet to
to take some investment money for my company
where the last two years
I had backed off from
META and I was still doing my consulting
CTO role there but
I had styled it as I was going to take
the Victorian gentleman scientist
route where I was going to be
the you know the wealthy person that
was going to go pursue science and learn
about this and do experiments
and honestly I'm surprised there aren't more
people like that that are
like me technical people that
made a bunch of money and are interested
in some of these possibly the
biggest leverage point in human history
I mean I know of I've heard of
a couple organizations that
are basically led by one rich techie guy
that gets a few people around
him to try to work on this
but I'm surprised that there's not more that there aren't
like a dozen of them
I mean maybe people are still
think that it's an unapproachable problem
that it's kind of beyond their ability to
to get a wrench on and have some effect on
like whatever startups they've run before
but I that was
my kind of like with all the
stuff I've learned whether it's gaming
aerospace whatever I I go
through a larval phase where I'm like okay
I'm sucking up all of this information
trying to see is this something
that I can actually do is this
something that's practical to
devote a large chunk of my life to
and I've gone through that with
the with the AI machine learning
space of things and
and I think I've got my arms
around it I've got the measure of it where
some of the most brilliant people in the
world are working on this problem but
nobody knows exactly the path
that it's going on we're throwing a lot
of things at the wall and seeing what sticks
I but I have
I you know another interesting thing
just learning about all of this the
contingency of your path to knowledge and
talking about the associations and the context
that you have with them where
people that learn in the same path
will have similar thought processes
and I think it's useful that I come
at this from a different background
different history than the people
that have had the largely academic backgrounds
for this where I have
huge blind spots that they could easily
point out but I have
a different set of experiences in
history and approaches to problems and systems
engineering that
you know that might turn out to be
useful and I can afford to take that
bet where I'm not
going to be destitute I am I was
you know I've been I have enough money to fund
myself working on this for the rest
of my life but what I was finding
is that I was
I was still
not committing where I had a foot
firmly in the VR and met a side of things
where in theory I've got
I've got a very nice position there I only
have to work one day a week for my
my consulting role but
but I was engaging every day I'd still
be like my computers there I'd be going
and checking the workplace and notes and
testing different things and communicating with people
but
but I did make the the decision recently
that no I'm going to get serious
I'm still going to keep my ties
with meta but I am
seriously going for the AGI
side of things and it's actually
a really interesting point because a lot of
the machine learning the AI
community is quite large but
really
basically almost everybody has taken the same
trajectory through life
in that community and it's so
interesting to have somebody like you
with a fundamentally different trajectory
and that's where the big solutions can
come because there is a kind of silo
and it's it is a
bunch of people kind of following the same kind
of set of ideas and I was really worried
that I didn't want to come
off as you know like an arrogant
outsider for things where I have
all the respect in the world for the work
that's you know it's been a miracle decade
we're in the midst of a scientific revolution
happening now and everybody doing
this is I you know these are
the the Einstein's and Bors and whatever
is of our modern era
I am and I was really happy to see
that the the people that I sat down and
talked with everybody does seem to really
be quite great about just happy
to talk about things willing to acknowledge
that we don't know what we're doing we're
figuring it out as we go along
and I mean I've got a you know a huge
I debt on this where
this all really started for me because
Sam Altman basically tried to recruit me to open
AI and it was at
a point when I didn't know anything about
what was really going on in
machine learning and in fact it's funny
how the first time you reached out to me
it's like four years ago for your AI
podcast for people
yeah for people
who are
listening to this should know that
first of all obviously
I've been a huge fan of yours for the longest
time but we've agreed to talk like yeah
like four years ago back when this
was called the artificial intelligence podcast
we wanted to
do a thing and you said yes
and I said it's like I don't know anything about
modern AI I said I could kind of take
an angle on machine perception because
you know I'm doing a lot of that with the
sensors and the virtual reality but
we could probably find something to talk about
and that's where
when did Sam talk to you about open AI
around the same time?
It was a bit after that so
I had done the most basic work
I had kind of done the neural
networks from scratch where I'd gone
and written it all in C just to make sure I
understood back propagation at the
lowest level and my nuts and bolts
approach but after
Sam approached me
I was flattering to think that
he thought that I could be useful at
open AI largely for
systems optimization
sorts of things without
being an expert but
I asked Ilya Sutskover
to give me a reading list and he gave
me a
binder full of all the papers that
okay these are the important things
if you really read and understand all of these
you'll know like 80% of what most of the
machine language researchers
work on and I went through and I read
all those papers multiple times and highlighted
them and went through and kind of
figured the things out there and then
started branching out into my own
sets of research on things and
actually started writing my own experiments
and doing kind of figuring out
finding out what I don't know
what the limits of my knowledge are
and starting to get some of my angles of attack
on things the things that I think are a little
bit different from what
people are doing and
I've had a couple years now
like two years since I kind of
left the full time position at meta
and now I've
kind of pulled the trigger and said
I'm going to get serious about it but
some of my lessons all the way back to Armadillo
space about how I know I need
to be more committed to this where
there is that
it's both a freedom and a cost in some ways
when you know that you're wealthy enough to say
it's like this doesn't really mean anything
I can spend
a million dollars a year for the rest
of my life and it doesn't
mean anything it's fine
but that is an opportunity
to just kind of meander
and I could see that in myself when
I'm doing some things it's like oh this is a kind of
interesting curious thing
let's look at this for a little while let's look at that
it's not really bearing down on the
problem so
there's a few things that
that I've done that are kind of tactics
for myself to make me more effective like
one thing I noticed I was not
doing well is I had
a Google cloud account with to get
GPUs there and I was finding I was very
rarely doing that for no good
psychological reasons where I'm like oh
I can always think of something to do other than to
set up instances and run an experiment
I can you know keep working on my local
Titans or something
but it was really stupid I mean it was not
a lot of money I should have been running more
experiments there so I thought to myself
well I'm gonna go buy
a quarter million dollar DGX station
I'm gonna just like sit it right there and it's gonna
mock me if I'm not using it if the fans
aren't running on that thing I'm not
properly utilizing it
and that's been helpful you know I've done a lot
more experiments since then it's been
interesting where I thought I'd be doing all
this low level in the link optimize
stuff but 90% of what I do is just spin up
four instances of an experiment with different
hyper parameters on it
you're doing
like really sort of building up intuition
by doing ML experiments of different kinds
but so
the next big thing though is
I am you know I decided
that I was gonna take some take some investor
money because I
have an overactive sense of responsibility
about other people's money
I am and it's like
I don't want
a lot of my push and my
passionate in treaties for things that
met are it's like I don't want suck to have wasted
his money investing in Oculus
I want it to work out I want it to change
the world I want it to be worth
all of this time money and effort
going into it and I
expect that it's going to be that like
that with my company
where it's a huge forcing function
this investment investors
that are going to expect something
of me now we've all had the conversation
that this is a low probability
long term bet it's not something
that there's a million things I could do
that I would have line of sight on the value
proposition for this isn't that I think
there are there are unknown unknowns
in the way but
it's one of these things that it's
it's hyper ball but it's potentially
one of the most important things humans ever
do and it's something that I think is
within our lifetimes if not within
a decade
to happen so
yeah this is just now happening
like term sheet like the ink is barely
virtually barely dry on drying
I mean as I mentioned you're all flying
like somebody I admire and
some of you know Andre Carpathia I think
the two of you different trajectories
in life but approach problems
similarly in that he codes
stuff from scratch up all the time
and
he's created a bunch of little things
outside of
even outside the course at Stanford
that have been tremendously
useful to build up intuition
about stuff but also to
help people and they're all
in the realm of AI
do you see yourself
potentially doing things like this or
not necessarily solving a gigantic
problem but on the journey on the
path to that
building up intuitions
and
sharing code
or ideas or systems
that
give inklings of AGI
but also kind of are useful to
people in some way so yeah first of all Andre
is awesome I learned a lot when I was going
through my larval phase from his blog posts
and his Stanford course and
you know super valuable I got to meet him
first a couple years ago when I was
first kind of starting off on
my gentleman scientist bit
and just
a couple months ago when he went out on his sabbatical
he stopped by in Dallas and we talked
for a while and I had
a great time with him and then when I heard he actually left
Tesla I did of course along with a hundred
other people say hey if you
ever want to work with me it would
be an honor so
he thinks that he's going to be doing this educational
work but I think someone's going to make him an offer
he can't refuse before
he gets too far along on it.
His current interest is educational
so yeah
he's a special mind.
Is there something you could speak to what makes
him so special?
He was
very much a programmers programmer that was
doing machine learning work rather than
it's a different feel than
an academic where you can see it in
paper sometimes where somebody that's
really a mathematician or a statistician
at heart and they're doing something
with machine learning but
Andre is about getting something done
and you could see it in
all of his earliest approaches to
here's how reinforcement learning works
here's how recurrent neural networks work
here's how transformers work
here's how crypto works
and
yeah it's just
one of his old posts was like a
hacker's guide to machine learning
he deprecated that and said don't really pay
attention to what's in here but
it's that thought that carries through
in a lot of it where
back again to that hacker mentality
and the hacker ethic with what he's doing
and sharing all of it.
Yeah and a lot of his approach to a new thing
like you said larva stage
is let me code up
the simplest possible thing
to build up intuition about it.
Yeah like I say I sketch with structs and things
when I'm just thinking about a problem
I'm thinking in some degree of code.
You are
also among many things a martial
artist both Judo and Jiu Jitsu
how has this helped
make you the person you are?
So I mean I was a competent club player
in Judo and grappling
I mean I was by no means any kind
of a superstar but
I went through a few phases with it
where I did some
when I was quite young a little bit
more when I was 17
and then I got into it
kind of seriously in my mid 30s
and I went pretty far with it
and I was pretty good
at some of the things that I was doing
and I did appreciate it quite a bit
where
on the one hand it's always
if you're going to do exercise or something
it's a more motivating form of exercise
and if someone is crushing you
you are motivated
to do something about that
to up your attributes and be better about
getting out of that.
But there's also that sense that
I was not
a sports guy I did do wrestling
junior high and I often wish
that I think I would have
been good for me if I'd carried that on
into high school and had a little bit more
of that I mean it's like I
you know felt a little bit of wrestling
vibe with always going on about embracing
the grind and like that push that I
associate with the wrestling team
that I in hindsight
I wish I had gone through that and pushed myself
that way.
But even getting back into Judo and Jiu Jitsu
in my mid 30s as usually
man on the mat with that
there was still the
sense that
working out with the group
and having the guys that
you're beating each other up with it
but you just feel good
coming out of it and I can remember those
driving home
aching in various ways and just thinking
it's like that was really great
and
it's mixing with a bunch of people that had
nothing to do with any of the things that
I worked with you know every once in a while
someone would be like oh you're the doom guy
and I but for the most part
it was just different slice of life
you know a good thing
and I made the call when I was
40 that's like maybe I'm getting a little old
for this I had separated a rib
and tweaked a few things and I got out
without any really bad injuries
and I was like
have I dodged enough bullets should I
hang it up I went back
I've gone a couple times
in the last decade trying to get my kids
into it a little bit I didn't really stick
with any of them but it was fun to get
back on the mats I really
hurts for a while when you haven't gone
I gone for a while but
I still debate this
pretty constantly my brother's only a year younger
than me and he's going kind of hard in jujitsu
right now and I you know he was
just he won a few medals at the last
tournament he was at competing
and I was thinking yeah I guess we're
in the executive division if you're over 50
or over 45 or something
and it's
not out of the question that I
go back at some point and do some of this
but again I'm just reorganizing my life
around more focus
probably not going to happen I'm pushing
my exercise around
to give me longer uninterrupted intellectual
focus time pushing it to the beginning
or the end of the game running and stuff like that
walking yeah running
and calisthenics and some things like
that but it allows you to still think about
a problem and but if you're going to a
judo club or something you're you've got to
fix it's going to be seven o clock or whatever
10 o clock on Saturday
although I talked about this a little bit
when I was on Rogan and shortly after
that Carlos Machado did reach out and
I had trained with him for years
back in the day and he was like hey
we've got kind of a small private club
with a bunch of executive type
people and
it gets it does tempt me
yeah I don't know if you know him but
John Donahar
here at Austin
with Gordon Ryan and a few other folks and
he has a very interesting way
very deep systematic way of thinking
about jiu jitsu that
reveals the
chest of it the
the like the
the science of it and I do
think about that more as kind of an older
person considering the martial arts where
I can remember the very earliest
days getting back into judo and I'm like
teach me submissions right now
you know it's like learn the arm bar learn the choke
I but as you get older
you start thinking more about it's like okay
I really do want to like learn the entire
canon of judo it's like aren't all the
different things there and like all the
different approaches for it not just the
you know if you want to compete there's just a
handful of things you learn really really well
but sometimes there's interest in learning a
little bit more of the scope there and
figuring some things out from
you know at one point I had wasn't exactly
a spreadsheet but I did have a
you know a big long text file with like here's
the things that I learned in here like ways
you chain this together and while
when I went back a few years
ago it was good to see that I
I whipped myself back into reasonable shape
about doing the basic grappling but I know
there was a ton of the subtleties that were
just that were gone but could probably be
brought back reasonably quickly
and there's also the benefit I mean
you're exceptionally successful now
um
you're brilliant
and the problem the old problem
of the ego
I still pushed kind of
harder than I should I mean that was
I was one of those people that I
I'm on the smaller side
for a lot of the people competing
and I would you know I'd go with all the
big guys and I'd go hard and I'd push
myself a lot and that would be
one of those where I would
I you know I'd be dangerous
to anyone for first five minutes but then
sometimes after that I'm already dead
and I knew it was terrible for me because
it made the you know it meant
I got less training time with all of that
when you go and you just gas out
you know relatively quickly there and I
like to think that I would be better
about that where after I gave up
judo I started doing the half marathons
and tough butters and things like that
and so when I did go back to the
local judo kai club I thought
it's like oh I should have better cardio for this
I'm a runner now and I do all of this
and didn't work out that way it was the same
old thing where just push
really hard strain really hard and
and of course when I worked with good guys
like Carlos it's like
just the whole flow like water thing is
real and he's just like that's true with
judo to some of the best people like
I've trained with Olympic gold medalists
and for some reason
with them everything's easier
everything it's you
actually start to feel
the science of it the music
of it the dance of it everything
is effortless
you understand that there's an art
to it it's not just an exercise
it was interesting where I did
go to the Kodokan in Japan
the birthplace of judo and everything
and I remember I rolled with one old guy
I didn't
start standing just started on groundwork
and it was striking how
different it was from Carlos he was still
he was better than me and he got my arm
you know I had to tap there but
it was a completely different style
where I just felt like I could do nothing
he was just enveloping me and just like slowly
ground it down put my arm and bent it
while with Carlos
you know he's just loose and free and you always
thought like oh you're just gonna go grab something
but never had any chance to do it but it was
very different feeling that's a good summary
of the difference between Jiu Jitsu and judo
and Jiu Jitsu there's it is a dance
and you feel like there's a freedom
and actually
anybody I tried like Gordon
Ryan one of the best
grappler in the world
there's a feeling like you can do anything
but
when you actually try to do something
you can't just magically doesn't work
but with the best judo players in the world
it does feel like there's
a blanket that weighs a thousand
pounds on top of you and
there's not a feeling like you can do anything
you just you're trapped
and that's a style that's a difference
in the style of martial arts
but it's also
once you start to study you understand it
all has to do with human movement and the
physics of it and the leverage and all that kind of stuff
and that's like that's super fascinating
at the end of the day for me
the biggest benefit is in the humbling
aspect when another human being
kind of tells you that
you know there's a hierarchy
or there's a
you're not that special
and in the most extreme case when you
tap to a choke you are basically
living because somebody
lets you live and that is
one of those if you think about it that is a
closer brush with mortality than
than most people consider
and that
kind of humbling
act is good to take to your
work then where it's harder to get
humbled you know
yeah because nobody's nobody that does any
martial art is coming out thinking I'm the best in the
world at anything because
everybody loses
let me ask you for advice
what advice would you give to young
people today
about life about career
how they can have a job
how they can have an impact
how they can have a life that
can be proud of
so it was kind of fun I got
invited to give the commencement speech back
at the I went to a college
for two semesters and
stopped out and went on to do my tech
stuff but they still wanted me to
come back and give a commencement speech
and I've got that pinned on my
twitter account I still feel good about
everything that I said there
and my biggest point
was that the path
for me might not be the path for everyone
and in fact the advice
the path that I took and even the advice
that I would give based on my
experience and learnings probably
isn't the best advice for everyone
because what I did was all about
this knowledge in depth it was
about not just having this
surface level ability to make things
do what I want but to really understand
them through and through to let me do
the systems engineering work and sometimes
find these inefficiencies
that can be bypassed
and that the whole
world doesn't need that you know most programmers
don't or engineers of any kind don't
necessarily need to do that they need to do
a little job that's been parceled out
to them be reliable
let people depend on you do quality
work with all of that
but people that do have
an inclination for wanting
to know things deeper
and learn things deeper
you know there are just layers
and layers of things out there
and it's amazing it's if you're
the right person that is excited
about that
the world's never been like this before
it's better than ever I mean everything that was
wonderful for me is still there
and there's whole new worlds to explore
on the different things that you can
do and that
you know it's hard work
embrace the grind with it
and understand as much as you can
and then be
prepared for opportunities to present themselves
where you can't just
say this is my golden life and just push
at that I mean you might be able to do
that but you're going to make more total progress
if you say I am preparing
myself with this broad set of tools
and then I'm being aware
of all the way things are changing
as I move through the world and as the whole
world changes around me and then looking
for opportunities to deploy the tools
that you've built and
there's going to be more and more of those
types of things there where
an awareness of what's happening
where the inefficiencies are
what things can be done
what's possible versus what's current practice
and then finding those areas where
you can go and make an adjustment
and make something that may
affect millions or billions of people
in the world make it better
when maybe from your own example
how are you able to recognize
this about yourself that you saw
the layers in a particular thing
and you were drawn to
discovering deeper and deeper truths about it
is that something that was obvious
to you that you couldn't help or is there
some actions you had to take to actually
allow yourself to dig deep
so in the earliest days of personal computers
I remember the reference manuals
and the very early ones even had
schematics of computers
in the background in the back
of the books as well as
firmware listings and things and I could look
at that and at that time when I was a
younger teenager I didn't understand
a lot of that stuff how the
different things worked I was
pulling out the information that I could get
but I always wanted to know all of that
there was like kind of
information sitting down there it's like
the elder lore that some gray beard wizard
I'm you know is the keeper of
and so I always felt that pull
for wanting to know more
wanting to explore the
the mysterious areas there
and you know and that followed
right in through all the things that
got the value exploring the video cards
leading to the I'm you know the
scrolling advantages you know exploring
some of the academic papers and things
learning about BSP trees and the different
things that that I could do
I'm you know with those systems and
just that the huge larval
phases going through aerospace just
reading bookshelves full of books
I mean again that point where I have enough money
I can buy all the books I want it was
it was so valuable
where I was terrible with my money
when I was a kid my mom thought I would always be
broke because you know I'd buy my
comic books and just be out of money but
it was like all the pizza I want
all the Diet Coke I want video games
and then books books and it
didn't take that much as I was making
twenty seven K a year I
felt rich and I was just getting all the things
that that I wanted but
that sense of you know that books
have always been magical to me and that was one of the things
that really made me smile is I
Andre had said he found you know when he came
over to my house he said he found my library inspiring
and just it was
great to see you know I still look at him he's kind of a younger
guy I sometimes wonder if younger
people these days have the same relationship
with books that I do where they were
such a cornerstone for me in so many
ways but that sense that yeah I
always wanted to know it all I know I can't
and that was like one of the last things I said
you know you can't know everything but you
should convince yourself that you can know anything
you know any one particular
thing it was created and discovered
by humans you can learn it you can
find out what you need on there and you
can learn it deeply yeah you
can drive a nail down through whatever
layer cake problem space you've got
and learn a cross section
there and not only can you have an impact
doing that you can just
you can attain happiness doing that
there's something so fulfilling about
becoming a craftsman of a thing
yeah and I don't want to tell people that look
this is a good career move just
you know grit your teeth and you know and bear it
I you know you want people
you wanted and I do think
it is possible sometimes to find the joy
in something like it might not immediately
appeal to you but I had told
people early on like in
software times that I
you know it a lot of game developers
are in it just because they are so passionate
about games but I was always
really more flexible in
what appealed to me where I said
I think I could be quite
engaged doing operating system
work even database work I
would find the interest in that
because I think most things that are
significant in the world have a lot
of layers and complexity to them
and a lot of opportunities hidden within
them so
that would probably be the most important thing to encourage
to people is that
you can it's like weaponized curiosity
you can deploy your curiosity
to find I to kind of like make
things useful and valuable
to you even if they don't immediately appear
that way deploy your curiosity
yeah that's very true
we've mentioned this debate point
whether mortality or fear
of mortality is fundamental
to creating an AGI
but let's talk about whether it's
fundamental to human beings do you
think about your own mortality
I really don't
and you probably always
have to like take with a grain of salt
anything somebody says about fundamental things
like that I am
but I don't think about
really aging
impending death legacy with
I with my children things like
that and clearly it seems
most of the world does a lot
a lot more than I do
so I mean I think I'm an outlier
in that where
it's
it doesn't wind up being a real part of
my thinking and motivation
about things so daily existence
is about
sort of the people you love
and the problems
before you I'm very much focused on
what I'm working on right now
I do take that back
there's one aspect where the
kind of finiteness of the life does impact
me and that is about
thinking about the scope of the problems
that I'm working on when I
decided to work on when I was like
nuclear fission or AGI these are
big ticket things that
that are impact
large fractions of the world
and I was thinking to myself at some level
that okay I mean I may
have a couple more swings
at bat with me at full
capability but yes my
my mental abilities will decay
with age you know mostly inevitably
I don't think it's a 0%
chance that we will address some of that
before it becomes a problem for me I think
exciting medical stuff in the next couple decades
but I do have this
kind of vague plan that when
I'm not at the top of my game and I don't feel that
I'm you know in a position to put a
dent in the world some way that
I'll probably wind up doing some kind of
recreational retro programming or
you know I'll work on some
you know something that I would not
devote my life to now but I can
while away my time as the old man
gardening in the code worlds
and then
to step back even bigger
let me ask you about why we're here
we human beings
what's the meaning of it all
what's the meaning of life John Carmich
so very similar with that last question
I know a lot of people fret
about this question a lot and I just
really don't
you know we are
biological creatures that
happenstance of evolution
you know we have innate drives
that evolution crafted for
survival and passing on of genetic
codes
I don't
find a lot of value in trying to go
much deeper than that I have my motivation
some of which are
you know some of which are probably genetically coded
many of which are contingent on my
upbringing and the path that I've had through my life
I don't
run into like spades of
depression or envy or anything
that winds up being
a challenge and forcing a
degree of soul searching with things like that
I seem to be okay
you know kind of without that
as a brilliant ant in the ant colony
without looking up to the sky wondering
why the hell am I here again
so the
sky of it the incredible
mystery
of the fact that we started
first of all the origin of life on earth
and from that
from single cell organisms
the entirety of the evolutionary process
took us somehow to this incredibly intelligent
thing that is able to
build Wolfenstein 3D
and doom and quake and
take a crack at the problem
of AGI and create things that
eventually supersede human beings
that doesn't
the why of it
is um
it's been my experience that people
that focus on
that don't focus on the here and now right in
front of them tend to be less effective
I mean it's not 100%
you know vision matters to some
people but I
it doesn't seem to be a necessary motivator
for me and I think that
the process of getting there is usually
done against like the magic of gradient descent
people just don't believe
that just looking locally gets you
to all of these spectacular things
that's been you know the decades
of looking at I
really some of the smartest people
in the world that would just push back
forever against this idea that
it's not this grand sophisticated
vision of everything but
little tiny steps local information
winds up leading to all the best answers
so the meaning of life
is uh following
locally wherever the gradient
descent takes you
this was an incredible conversation
officially the longest conversation
I've ever done on the podcast
which means a lot to me because
I get to do it with one of my heroes
John I can't tell you how much it means to me that
you would sit down with me you're an incredible
human being um
I can't wait what you do next but you've already
changed the world you're an inspiration to
so many people and again
we haven't covered like
most of what I was playing to talk
about so I hope we get a chance to talk
some day in the future and I can't wait
to see what you do next thank you so
much again for talking to me thank you very much
thanks for listening to this
conversation with John Carmack
to support this podcast please check out our
sponsors in the description
and now let me leave you with some words
from John Carmack himself
focused hard work
is the real key to success
keep your eyes on the goal
and just keep taking the next step towards
completing it if you aren't sure
which way to do something do it both ways
and see which works better
thank you for listening
and hope to see you next time